Pablo Picasso
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Picasso)
"Picasso" redirects here. For other uses, see Picasso (disambiguation).
This name uses Spanish naming customs: the first or paternal family name is Ruiz and the second or maternal family name is Picasso.
Pablo Picasso
Portrait de Picasso, 1908.jpg
Picasso in 1908
Born 	Pablo Diego José Francisco de Paula Juan Nepomuceno María de los Remedios Cipriano de la Santísima Trinidad Ruiz y Picasso[1]
25 October 1881
Málaga, Spain
Died 	8 April 1973 (aged 91)
Mougins, France
Resting place 	Château of Vauvenargues
43.554142°N 5.604438°E
Nationality 	Spanish
Education 	José Ruiz y Blasco (father),
Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando
Known for 	Painting, drawing, sculpture printmaking, ceramics, stage design, writing
Notable work 	Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907)
Guernica (1937)
The Weeping Woman (1937)
Movement 	Cubism, Surrealism
Spouse(s) 	Olga Khokhlova (1918–55)
Jacqueline Roque (1961–73)

Pablo Ruiz y Picasso, also known as Pablo Picasso (/pɪˈkɑːsoʊ, -ˈkæsoʊ/;[2] Spanish: [ˈpaβlo piˈkaso]; 25 October 1881 – 8 April 1973), was a Spanish painter, sculptor, printmaker, ceramicist, stage designer, poet and playwright who spent most of his adult life in France. As one of the greatest and most influential artists of the 20th century, he is known for co-founding the Cubist movement, the invention of constructed sculpture,[3][4] the co-invention of collage, and for the wide variety of styles that he helped develop and explore. Among his most famous works are the proto-Cubist Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907), and Guernica (1937), a portrayal of the Bombing of Guernica by the German and Italian airforces at the behest of the Spanish nationalist government during the Spanish Civil War.

Picasso, Henri Matisse and Marcel Duchamp are regarded as the three artists who most defined the revolutionary developments in the plastic arts in the opening decades of the 20th century, responsible for significant developments in painting, sculpture, printmaking and ceramics.[5][6][7][8]

Picasso demonstrated extraordinary artistic talent in his early years, painting in a naturalistic manner through his childhood and adolescence. During the first decade of the 20th century, his style changed as he experimented with different theories, techniques, and ideas. His work is often categorized into periods. While the names of many of his later periods are debated, the most commonly accepted periods in his work are the Blue Period (1901–1904), the Rose Period (1904–1906), the African-influenced Period (1907–1909), Analytic Cubism (1909–1912), and Synthetic Cubism (1912–1919), also referred to as the Crystal period.

Exceptionally prolific throughout the course of his long life, Picasso achieved universal renown and immense fortune for his revolutionary artistic accomplishments, and became one of the best-known figures in 20th-century art.

Contents

    1 Early life
    2 Career beginnings
        2.1 Before 1900
        2.2 Blue Period
        2.3 Rose Period
    3 Modern art transformed
        3.1 African-influenced Period
        3.2 Cubism
        3.3 Crystal period
        3.4 Fame
        3.5 Classicism and surrealism
        3.6 World War II and beyond
        3.7 Later works
    4 Death
    5 Political views
    6 Style and technique
    7 Artistic legacy
        7.1 Recent major exhibitions
    8 See also
    9 Notes
    10 References
    11 External links

Early life
Pablo Picasso with his sister Lola, 1889

Picasso was baptized Pablo Diego José Francisco de Paula Juan Nepomuceno María de los Remedios Cipriano de la Santísima Trinidad Ruiz y Picasso,[1] a series of names honoring various saints and relatives.[9] Ruiz y Picasso were included for his father and mother, respectively, as per Spanish law. Born in the city of Málaga in the Andalusian region of Spain, he was the first child of Don José Ruiz y Blasco (1838–1913) and María Picasso y López.[10] Though baptized a Catholic, Picasso would later on become an atheist.[11] Picasso's family was of middle-class background. His father was a painter who specialized in naturalistic depictions of birds and other game. For most of his life Ruiz was a professor of art at the School of Crafts and a curator of a local museum. Ruiz's ancestors were minor aristocrats.

Picasso showed a passion and a skill for drawing from an early age. According to his mother, his first words were "piz, piz", a shortening of lápiz, the Spanish word for "pencil".[12] From the age of seven, Picasso received formal artistic training from his father in figure drawing and oil painting. Ruiz was a traditional academic artist and instructor, who believed that proper training required disciplined copying of the masters, and drawing the human body from plaster casts and live models. His son became preoccupied with art to the detriment of his classwork.
Pablo Picasso, 1901, Old Woman (Woman with Gloves), oil on cardboard, 67 x 52.1 cm, Philadelphia Museum of Art
Pablo Picasso, 1901-02, Femme au café (Absinthe Drinker), oil on canvas, 73 x 54 cm, Hermitage Museum, Saint Petersburg, Russia

The family moved to A Coruña in 1891, where his father became a professor at the School of Fine Arts. They stayed almost four years. On one occasion, the father found his son painting over his unfinished sketch of a pigeon. Observing the precision of his son's technique, an apocryphal story relates, Ruiz felt that the thirteen-year-old Picasso had surpassed him, and vowed to give up painting,[13] though paintings by him exist from later years.

In 1895, Picasso was traumatized when his seven-year-old sister, Conchita, died of diphtheria.[14] After her death, the family moved to Barcelona, where Ruiz took a position at its School of Fine Arts. Picasso thrived in the city, regarding it in times of sadness or nostalgia as his true home.[15] Ruiz persuaded the officials at the academy to allow his son to take an entrance exam for the advanced class. This process often took students a month, but Picasso completed it in a week, and the jury admitted him, at just 13. The student lacked discipline but made friendships that would affect him in later life. His father rented a small room for him close to home so he could work alone, yet he checked up on him numerous times a day, judging his drawings. The two argued frequently.

Picasso's father and uncle decided to send the young artist to Madrid's Royal Academy of San Fernando, the country's foremost art school.[15] At age 16, Picasso set off for the first time on his own, but he disliked formal instruction and stopped attending classes soon after enrollment. Madrid held many other attractions. The Prado housed paintings by Diego Velázquez, Francisco Goya, and Francisco Zurbarán. Picasso especially admired the works of El Greco; elements such as his elongated limbs, arresting colors, and mystical visages are echoed in Picasso's later work.
Career beginnings
Before 1900
Picasso in 1904

Picasso's training under his father began before 1890. His progress can be traced in the collection of early works now held by the Museu Picasso in Barcelona, which provides one of the most comprehensive records extant of any major artist's beginnings.[16] During 1893 the juvenile quality of his earliest work falls away, and by 1894 his career as a painter can be said to have begun.[17] The academic realism apparent in the works of the mid-1890s is well displayed in The First Communion (1896), a large composition that depicts his sister, Lola. In the same year, at the age of 14, he painted Portrait of Aunt Pepa, a vigorous and dramatic portrait that Juan-Eduardo Cirlot has called "without a doubt one of the greatest in the whole history of Spanish painting."[18]

In 1897 his realism became tinged with Symbolist influence, in a series of landscape paintings rendered in non-naturalistic violet and green tones. What some call his Modernist period (1899–1900) followed. His exposure to the work of Rossetti, Steinlen, Toulouse-Lautrec and Edvard Munch, combined with his admiration for favorite old masters such as El Greco, led Picasso to a personal version of modernism in his works of this period.[19]

Picasso made his first trip to Paris, then the art capital of Europe, in 1900. There, he met his first Parisian friend, journalist and poet Max Jacob, who helped Picasso learn the language and its literature. Soon they shared an apartment; Max slept at night while Picasso slept during the day and worked at night. These were times of severe poverty, cold, and desperation. Much of his work was burned to keep the small room warm. During the first five months of 1901, Picasso lived in Madrid, where he and his anarchist friend Francisco de Asís Soler founded the magazine Arte Joven (Young Art), which published five issues. Soler solicited articles and Picasso illustrated the journal, mostly contributing grim cartoons depicting and sympathizing with the state of the poor. The first issue was published on 31 March 1901, by which time the artist had started to sign his work Picasso; before he had signed Pablo Ruiz y Picasso.[20]
La Vie (1903), Cleveland Museum of Art
The Old Guitarist (1903), Chicago Art Institute
Blue Period
For more details on this topic, see Picasso's Blue Period.

Picasso's Blue Period (1901–1904), characterized by somber paintings rendered in shades of blue and blue-green, only occasionally warmed by other colors, began either in Spain in early 1901, or in Paris in the second half of the year.[21] Many paintings of gaunt mothers with children date from the Blue Period, during which Picasso divided his time between Barcelona and Paris. In his austere use of color and sometimes doleful subject matter – prostitutes and beggars are frequent subjects – Picasso was influenced by a trip through Spain and by the suicide of his friend Carlos Casagemas. Starting in autumn of 1901 he painted several posthumous portraits of Casagemas, culminating in the gloomy allegorical painting La Vie (1903), now in the Cleveland Museum of Art.[22]
Pablo Picasso, 1905, Au Lapin Agile (At the Lapin Agile) (Arlequin tenant un verre), oil on canvas, 99.1 x 100.3 cm, Metropolitan Museum of Art

The same mood pervades the well-known etching The Frugal Repast (1904),[23] which depicts a blind man and a sighted woman, both emaciated, seated at a nearly bare table. Blindness is a recurrent theme in Picasso's works of this period, also represented in The Blindman's Meal (1903, the Metropolitan Museum of Art) and in the portrait of Celestina (1903). Other works include Portrait of Soler and Portrait of Suzanne Bloch.
Pablo Picasso, 1905, Garçon à la pipe, (Boy with a Pipe), private collection, Rose Period
Rose Period
For more details on this topic, see Picasso's Rose Period.

The Rose Period (1904–1906)[24] is characterized by a more cheery style with orange and pink colors, and featuring many circus people, acrobats and harlequins known in France as saltimbanques. The harlequin, a comedic character usually depicted in checkered patterned clothing, became a personal symbol for Picasso. Picasso met Fernande Olivier, a bohemian artist who became his mistress, in Paris in 1904.[14] Olivier appears in many of his Rose Period paintings, many of which are influenced by his warm relationship with her, in addition to his increased exposure to French painting. The generally upbeat and optimistic mood of paintings in this period is reminiscent of the 1899–1901 period (i.e. just prior to the Blue Period) and 1904 can be considered a transition year between the two periods.
Portrait of Gertrude Stein, 1906, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York City. When someone commented that Stein did not look like her portrait, Picasso replied, "She will".[25]

By 1905, Picasso became a favorite of American art collectors Leo and Gertrude Stein. Their older brother Michael Stein and his wife Sarah also became collectors of his work. Picasso painted portraits of both Gertrude Stein and her nephew Allan Stein. Gertrude Stein became Picasso's principal patron, acquiring his drawings and paintings and exhibiting them in her informal Salon at her home in Paris.[26] At one of her gatherings in 1905, he met Henri Matisse, who was to become a lifelong friend and rival. The Steins introduced him to Claribel Cone and her sister Etta who were American art collectors; they also began to acquire Picasso and Matisse's paintings. Eventually Leo Stein moved to Italy. Michael and Sarah Stein became patrons of Matisse, while Gertrude Stein continued to collect Picasso.[27]

In 1907 Picasso joined an art gallery that had recently been opened in Paris by Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler. Kahnweiler was a German art historian and art collector who became one of the premier French art dealers of the 20th century. He was among the first champions of Pablo Picasso, Georges Braque and the Cubism that they jointly developed. Kahnweiler promoted burgeoning artists such as André Derain, Kees van Dongen, Fernand Léger, Juan Gris, Maurice de Vlaminck and several others who had come from all over the globe to live and work in Montparnasse at the time.[28]
Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907), Museum of Modern Art, New York
Modern art transformed
African-influenced Period
See also: Picasso's African Period and Proto-Cubism

Picasso's African-influenced Period (1907–1909) begins with the two figures on the right in his painting, Les Demoiselles d'Avignon, which were inspired by African artefacts. Formal ideas developed during this period lead directly into the Cubist period that follows.
Cubism

Analytic cubism (1909–1912) is a style of painting Picasso developed with Georges Braque using monochrome brownish and neutral colors. Both artists took apart objects and "analyzed" them in terms of their shapes. Picasso and Braque's paintings at this time share many similarities. Synthetic cubism (1912–1919) was a further development of the genre, in which cut paper fragments – often wallpaper or portions of newspaper pages – were pasted into compositions, marking the first use of collage in fine art.

In Paris, Picasso entertained a distinguished coterie of friends in the Montmartre and Montparnasse quarters, including André Breton, poet Guillaume Apollinaire, writer Alfred Jarry, and Gertrude Stein. Apollinaire was arrested on suspicion of stealing the Mona Lisa from the Louvre in 1911. Apollinaire pointed to his friend Picasso, who was also brought in for questioning, but both were later exonerated.[29]
Crystal period
Main article: Crystal Cubism

Between 1915 and 1917, Picasso began a series of paintings depicting highly geometric and minimalist Cubist objects, consisting of either a pipe, a guitar or a glass, with an occasional element of collage. "Hard-edged square-cut diamonds", notes art historian John Richardson, "these gems do not always have upside or downside".[30][31] "We need a new name to designate them," wrote Picasso to Gertrude Stein: Maurice Raynal suggested "Crystal Cubism".[30][32] These "little gems" may have been produced by Picasso in response to critics who had claimed his defection from the movement, through his experimentation with classicism within the so-called return to order following the war.[30][33]

    1909, Femme assise (Sitzende Frau), oil on canvas, 100 × 80 cm, Staatliche Museen, Neue Nationalgalerie, Berlin

    1909–10, Figure dans un Fauteuil (Seated Nude, Femme nue assise), oil on canvas, 92.1 × 73 cm, Tate Modern, London. This painting from the collection of Wilhelm Uhde was confiscated by the French state and sold at the Hôtel Drouot in 1921

    1910, Woman with Mustard Pot (La Femme au pot de moutarde), oil on canvas, 73 × 60 cm, Gemeentemuseum, The Hague. Exhibited at the Armory Show, New York, Chicago, Boston 1913

    1910, Girl with a Mandolin (Fanny Tellier), oil on canvas, 100.3 × 73.6 cm, Museum of Modern Art, New York

    1910, Portrait of Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler, The Art Institute of Chicago. Picasso wrote of Kahnweiler "What would have become of us if Kahnweiler hadn't had a business sense?"

    1910–11, Guitariste, La mandoliniste (Woman playing guitar or mandolin), oil on canvas

    c.1911, Le Guitariste. Reproduced in Albert Gleizes and Jean Metzinger, Du "Cubisme", 1912

    1911, Still Life with a Bottle of Rum, oil on canvas, 61.3 × 50.5 cm, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York

    1911, The Poet (Le poète), oil on linen, 131.2 × 89.5 cm (51 5/8 × 35 1/4 in), The Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, Peggy Guggenheim Collection, Venice

    1911–12, Violon (Violin), oil on canvas, 100 × 73 cm (oval), Kröller-Müller Museum, Otterlo, Netherlands. This painting from the collection of Wilhelm Uhde was confiscated by the French state and sold at the Hôtel Drouot in 1921

    1913, Bouteille, clarinet, violon, journal, verre, 55 × 45 cm. This painting from the collection of Wilhelm Uhde was confiscated by the French state and sold at the Hôtel Drouot in 1921

    1913, Femme assise dans un fauteuil (Eva), Woman in a Chemise in an Armchair, oil on canvas, 149.9 × 99.4 cm, Leonard A. Lauder Cubist Collection, Metropolitan Museum of Art

    1913–14, Head (Tête), cut and pasted colored paper, gouache and charcoal on paperboard, 43.5 × 33 cm, Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, Edinburgh

    1913–14, L'Homme aux cartes (Card Player), oil on canvas, 108 × 89.5 cm, Museum of Modern Art, New York

    1914–15, Nature morte au compotier (Still Life with Compote and Glass), oil on canvas, 63.5 × 78.7 cm (25 × 31 in), Columbus Museum of Art, Ohio

    1916, L'anis del mono (Bottle of Anis del Mono), oil on canvas, 46 × 54.6 cm, Detroit Institute of Arts, Michigan

Fame
Costume design by Pablo Picasso representing skyscrapers and boulevards, for Serge Diaghilev's Ballets Russes performance of Parade at Théâtre du Châtelet, Paris 18 May 1917

After acquiring some fame and fortune, Picasso left Olivier for Marcelle Humbert, who he called Eva Gouel. Picasso included declarations of his love for Eva in many Cubist works. Picasso was devastated by her premature death from illness at the age of 30 in 1915.[34]
Pablo Picasso and scene painters sitting on the front cloth for Léonide Massine's ballet Parade, staged by Sergei Diaghilev's Ballets Russes at the Théâtre du Châtelet, Paris, 1917
Parade, 1917, curtain designed for the ballet Parade. The work is the largest of Picasso's paintings. Centre Pompidou-Metz, Metz, France, May 2012.
Portrait d'Olga dans un fauteuil (Olga in an Armchair), 1918, Musée Picasso, Paris, France
Portrait of Igor Stravinsky, c. 1920

At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 Picasso was living in Avignon. Braque and Derain were mobilized and Apollinaire joined the French artillery, while the Spaniard Juan Gris remained from the Cubist circle. During the war Picasso was able to continue painting uninterrupted, unlike his French comrades. His paintings became more sombre and his life changed with dramatic consequences. Kahnweiler’s contract had terminated on his exile from France. At this point Picasso’s work would be taken on by the art dealer Léonce Rosenberg. After the loss of Eva Gouel, Picasso had an affair with Gaby Lespinasse. During the spring of 1916 Apollinaire returned from the front wounded. They renewed their friendship, but Picasso began to frequent new social circles.[35]

Towards the end of World War I, Picasso made a number of important relationships with figures associated with Serge Diaghilev's Ballets Russes. Among his friends during this period were Jean Cocteau, Jean Hugo, Juan Gris, and others. In the summer of 1918, Picasso married Olga Khokhlova, a ballerina with Sergei Diaghilev's troupe, for whom Picasso was designing a ballet, Erik Satie's Parade, in Rome; they spent their honeymoon near Biarritz in the villa of glamorous Chilean art patron Eugenia Errázuriz.

After return from honeymoon, and in desperate need of money, Picasso started his exclusive relationship with the French-Jewish art dealer Paul Rosenberg. As part of his first duties, Rosenberg agreed to rent the couple an apartment in Paris at his own expense, which was located next to his own house. This was the start of a deep brother-like friendship between two very different men, that would last until the outbreak of World War II.

Khokhlova introduced Picasso to high society, formal dinner parties, and all the social niceties attendant to the life of the rich in 1920s Paris. The two had a son, Paulo Picasso,[36] who would grow up to be a dissolute motorcycle racer and chauffeur to his father. Khokhlova's insistence on social propriety clashed with Picasso's bohemian tendencies and the two lived in a state of constant conflict. During the same period that Picasso collaborated with Diaghilev's troupe, he and Igor Stravinsky collaborated on Pulcinella in 1920. Picasso took the opportunity to make several drawings of the composer.

In 1927 Picasso met 17-year-old Marie-Thérèse Walter and began a secret affair with her. Picasso's marriage to Khokhlova soon ended in separation rather than divorce, as French law required an even division of property in the case of divorce, and Picasso did not want Khokhlova to have half his wealth. The two remained legally married until Khokhlova's death in 1955. Picasso carried on a long-standing affair with Marie-Thérèse Walter and fathered a daughter with her, named Maya. Marie-Thérèse lived in the vain hope that Picasso would one day marry her, and hanged herself four years after Picasso's death. Throughout his life Picasso maintained several mistresses in addition to his wife or primary partner. Picasso was married twice and had four children by three women:

    Paulo (4 February 1921 – 5 June 1975) (Born Paul Joseph Picasso) – with Olga Khokhlova
    Maya (5 September 1935 – ) (Born Maria de la Concepcion Picasso) – with Marie-Thérèse Walter
    Claude (15 May 1947 –) (Born Claude Pierre Pablo Picasso) – with Françoise Gilot
    Paloma (19 April 1949 – ) (Born Anne Paloma Picasso) – with Françoise Gilot

Photographer and painter Dora Maar was also a constant companion and lover of Picasso. The two were closest in the late 1930s and early 1940s, and it was Maar who documented the painting of Guernica.
Classicism and surrealism
Pablo Picasso, 1918, Pierrot, oil on canvas, 92.7 x 73 cm, Museum of Modern Art, New York
Pablo Picasso, 1919, Sleeping Peasants, gouache, watercolor and pencil on paper, 31.1 x 48.9 cm, Museum of Modern Art

In February 1917, Picasso made his first trip to Italy.[37] In the period following the upheaval of World War I, Picasso produced work in a neoclassical style. This "return to order" is evident in the work of many European artists in the 1920s, including André Derain, Giorgio de Chirico, Gino Severini, Jean Metzinger, the artists of the New Objectivity movement and of the Novecento Italiano movement. Picasso's paintings and drawings from this period frequently recall the work of Raphael and Ingres.

In 1925 the Surrealist writer and poet André Breton declared Picasso as 'one of ours' in his article Le Surréalisme et la peinture, published in Révolution surréaliste. Les Demoiselles was reproduced for the first time in Europe in the same issue. Yet Picasso exhibited Cubist works at the first Surrealist group exhibition in 1925; the concept of 'psychic automatism in its pure state' defined in the Manifeste du surréalisme never appealed to him entirely. He did at the time develop new imagery and formal syntax for expressing himself emotionally, "releasing the violence, the psychic fears and the eroticism that had been largely contained or sublimated since 1909", writes art historian Melissa McQuillan.[38] Although this transition in Picasso's work was informed by Cubism for its spatial relations, "the fusion of ritual and abandon in the imagery recalls the primitivism of the Demoiselles and the elusive psychological resonances of his Symbolist work", writes McQuillan.[38] Surrealism revived Picasso’s attraction to primitivism and eroticism.[38]
Guernica, 1937, Museo Reina Sofia

During the 1930s, the minotaur replaced the harlequin as a common motif in his work. His use of the minotaur came partly from his contact with the surrealists, who often used it as their symbol, and it appears in Picasso's Guernica. The minotaur and Picasso's mistress Marie-Thérèse Walter are heavily featured in his celebrated Vollard Suite of etchings.[39]

In 1939–40 the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, under its director Alfred Barr, a Picasso enthusiast, held a major retrospective of Picasso's principal works until that time. This exhibition lionized the artist, brought into full public view in America the scope of his artistry, and resulted in a reinterpretation of his work by contemporary art historians and scholars.[40]

Arguably Picasso's most famous work is his depiction of the German bombing of Guernica during the Spanish Civil War – Guernica. This large canvas embodies for many the inhumanity, brutality and hopelessness of war. Asked to explain its symbolism, Picasso said, "It isn't up to the painter to define the symbols. Otherwise it would be better if he wrote them out in so many words! The public who look at the picture must interpret the symbols as they understand them."[41][42]

Guernica was on display in New York's Museum of Modern Art for many years. In 1981, it was returned to Spain and was on exhibit at the Casón del Buen Retiro. In 1992 the painting was put on display in Madrid's Reina Sofía Museum when it opened.
World War II and beyond

During the Second World War, Picasso remained in Paris while the Germans occupied the city. Picasso's artistic style did not fit the Nazi ideal of art, so he did not exhibit during this time. He was often harassed by the Gestapo. During one search of his apartment, an officer saw a photograph of the painting Guernica. "Did you do that?" the German asked Picasso. "No," he replied, "You did".[43]

Retreating to his studio, he continued to paint, producing works such as the Still Life with Guitar (1942) and The Charnel House (1944–48).[44] Although the Germans outlawed bronze casting in Paris, Picasso continued regardless, using bronze smuggled to him by the French Resistance.[45]
Stanisław Lorentz guides Pablo Picasso through the National Museum in Warsaw in Poland during exhibition Contemporary French Painters and Pablo Picasso's Ceramics, 1948. Picasso gave Warsaw's museum over a dozen of his ceramics, drawings and color prints.[46]

Around this time, Picasso took up writing as an alternative outlet. Between 1935 and 1959 he wrote over 300 poems. Largely untitled except for a date and sometimes the location of where it was written (for example "Paris 16 May 1936"), these works were gustatory, erotic and at times scatological, as were his two full-length plays Desire Caught by the Tail (1941) and The Four Little Girls (1949).[47][48]

In 1944, after the liberation of Paris, Picasso, then 63 years old, began a romantic relationship with a young art student named Françoise Gilot. She was 40 years younger than he was. Picasso grew tired of his mistress Dora Maar; Picasso and Gilot began to live together. Eventually they had two children: Claude, born in 1947 and Paloma, born in 1949. In her 1964 book Life with Picasso,[49] Gilot describes his abusive treatment and myriad infidelities which led her to leave him, taking the children with her. This was a severe blow to Picasso.

Picasso had affairs with women of an even greater age disparity than his and Gilot's. While still involved with Gilot, in 1951 Picasso had a six-week affair with Geneviève Laporte, who was four years younger than Gilot. By his 70s, many paintings, ink drawings and prints have as their theme an old, grotesque dwarf as the doting lover of a beautiful young model. Jacqueline Roque (1927–1986) worked at the Madoura Pottery in Vallauris on the French Riviera, where Picasso made and painted ceramics. She became his lover, and then his second wife in 1961. The two were together for the remainder of Picasso's life.

His marriage to Roque was also a means of revenge against Gilot; with Picasso's encouragement, Gilot had divorced her then husband, Luc Simon, with the plan to marry Picasso to secure the rights of her children as Picasso's legitimate heirs. Picasso had already secretly married Roque, after Gilot had filed for divorce. This strained his relationship with Claude and Paloma.[citation needed]

By this time, Picasso had constructed a huge Gothic home, and could afford large villas in the south of France, such as Mas Notre-Dame-de-Vie on the outskirts of Mougins, and in the Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur. He was an international celebrity, with often as much interest in his personal life as his art.

In addition to his artistic accomplishments, Picasso made a few film appearances, always as himself, including a cameo in Jean Cocteau's Testament of Orpheus. In 1955 he helped make the film Le Mystère Picasso (The Mystery of Picasso) directed by Henri-Georges Clouzot.
Later works
The Chicago Picasso a 50-foot high public Cubist sculpture. Donated by Picasso to the people of Chicago

Picasso was one of 250 sculptors who exhibited in the 3rd Sculpture International held at the Philadelphia Museum of Art in mid-1949. In the 1950s, Picasso's style changed once again, as he took to producing reinterpretations of the art of the great masters. He made a series of works based on Velázquez's painting of Las Meninas. He also based paintings on works by Goya, Poussin, Manet, Courbet and Delacroix.

He was commissioned to make a maquette for a huge 50-foot (15 m)-high public sculpture to be built in Chicago, known usually as the Chicago Picasso. He approached the project with a great deal of enthusiasm, designing a sculpture which was ambiguous and somewhat controversial. What the figure represents is not known; it could be a bird, a horse, a woman or a totally abstract shape. The sculpture, one of the most recognizable landmarks in downtown Chicago, was unveiled in 1967. Picasso refused to be paid $100,000 for it, donating it to the people of the city.

Picasso's final works were a mixture of styles, his means of expression in constant flux until the end of his life. Devoting his full energies to his work, Picasso became more daring, his works more colorful and expressive, and from 1968 to 1971 he produced a torrent of paintings and hundreds of copperplate etchings. At the time these works were dismissed by most as pornographic fantasies of an impotent old man or the slapdash works of an artist who was past his prime. Only later, after Picasso's death, when the rest of the art world had moved on from abstract expressionism, did the critical community come to see that Picasso had already discovered Neo-Expressionism and was, as so often before, ahead of his time.
Death

Pablo Picasso died on 8 April 1973 in Mougins, France, while he and his wife Jacqueline entertained friends for dinner. He was interred at the Chateau of Vauvenargues near Aix-en-Provence, a property he had acquired in 1958 and occupied with Jacqueline between 1959 and 1962. Jacqueline Roque prevented his children Claude and Paloma from attending the funeral.[50] Devastated and lonely after the death of Picasso, Jacqueline Roque killed herself by gunshot in 1986 when she was 59 years old.[51]
Political views

Aside from the several anti-war paintings that he created, Picasso remained personally neutral during World War I, the Spanish Civil War, and World War II, refusing to join the armed forces for any side or country. He had also remained aloof from the Catalan independence movement during his youth despite expressing general support and being friendly with activists within it. At the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1937, Picasso was already in his late fifties. He was even older at the onset of World War II, and could not be expected to take up arms in those conflicts. As a Spanish citizen living in France, Picasso was under no compulsion to fight against the invading Germans in either World War. In the Spanish Civil War, service for Spaniards living abroad was optional and would have involved a voluntary return to their country to join either side. While Picasso expressed anger and condemnation of Francisco Franco and fascists through his art, he did not take up arms against them. The Spanish Civil War provided the impetus for Picasso's first overtly political work, The Dream and Lie of Franco which was produced "specifically for propagandistic and fundraising purposes."[52] This surreal fusion of words and images was intended to be sold as a series of postcards to raise funds for the Spanish Republican cause.[52][53]

In 1944 Picasso joined the French Communist Party, attended an international peace conference in Poland, and in 1950 received the Stalin Peace Prize from the Soviet government,[54] But party criticism of a portrait of Stalin as insufficiently realistic cooled Picasso's interest in Soviet politics, though he remained a loyal member of the Communist Party until his death. In a 1945 interview with Jerome Seckler, Picasso stated: "I am a Communist and my painting is Communist painting. ... But if I were a shoemaker, Royalist or Communist or anything else, I would not necessarily hammer my shoes in a special way to show my politics."[55] His Communist militancy, common among continental intellectuals and artists at the time (although it was officially banned in Francoist Spain), has long been the subject of some controversy; a notable source or demonstration thereof was a quote commonly attributed to Salvador Dalí (with whom Picasso had a rather strained relationship[56]):

    Picasso es pintor, yo también; [...] Picasso es español, yo también; Picasso es comunista, yo tampoco.
    (Picasso is a painter, so am I; [...] Picasso is a Spaniard, so am I; Picasso is a communist, neither am I.)[57][58][59]

In the late 1940s his old friend the surrealist poet and Trotskyist[60] and anti-Stalinist André Breton was more blunt; refusing to shake hands with Picasso, he told him: "I don't approve of your joining the Communist Party nor with the stand you have taken concerning the purges of the intellectuals after the Liberation".[61]

In 1962, he received the Lenin Peace Prize.[62] Biographer and art critic John Berger felt his talents as an artist were "wasted" by the communists.[63]

According to Jean Cocteau's diaries, Picasso once said to him in reference to the communists: "I have joined a family, and like all families, it's full of shit".[64]

He was against the intervention of the United Nations and the United States[65] in the Korean War and he depicted it in Massacre in Korea.
Style and technique

Picasso was exceptionally prolific throughout his long lifetime. The total number of artworks he produced has been estimated at 50,000, comprising 1,885 paintings; 1,228 sculptures; 2,880 ceramics, roughly 12,000 drawings, many thousands of prints, and numerous tapestries and rugs.[66]

The medium in which Picasso made his most important contribution was painting.[67] In his paintings, Picasso used color as an expressive element, but relied on drawing rather than subtleties of color to create form and space.[67] He sometimes added sand to his paint to vary its texture. A nanoprobe of Picasso's The Red Armchair (1931) by physicists at Argonne National Laboratory in 2012 confirmed art historians' belief that Picasso used common house paint in many of his paintings.[68] Much of his painting was done at night by artificial light.

Picasso's early sculptures were carved from wood or modeled in wax or clay, but from 1909 to 1928 Picasso abandoned modeling and instead made sculptural constructions using diverse materials.[67] An example is Guitar (1912), a relief construction made of sheet metal and wire that Jane Fluegel terms a "three-dimensional planar counterpart of Cubist painting" that marks a "revolutionary departure from the traditional approaches, modeling and carving".[69]

From the beginning of his career, Picasso displayed an interest in subject matter of every kind,[70] and demonstrated a great stylistic versatility that enabled him to work in several styles at once. For example, his paintings of 1917 included the pointillist Woman with a Mantilla, the Cubist Figure in an Armchair, and the naturalistic Harlequin (all in the Museu Picasso, Barcelona). In 1919, he made a number of drawings from postcards and photographs that reflect his interest in the stylistic conventions and static character of posed photographs.[71] In 1921 he simultaneously painted several large neoclassical paintings and two versions of the Cubist composition Three Musicians (Museum of Modern Art, New York; Philadelphia Museum of Art).[37] In an interview published in 1923, Picasso said, "The several manners I have used in my art must not be considered as an evolution, or as steps towards an unknown ideal of painting ... If the subjects I have wanted to express have suggested different ways of expression I have never hesitated to adopt them."[37]

Although his Cubist works approach abstraction, Picasso never relinquished the objects of the real world as subject matter. Prominent in his Cubist paintings are forms easily recognized as guitars, violins, and bottles.[72] When Picasso depicted complex narrative scenes it was usually in prints, drawings, and small-scale works; Guernica (1937) is one of his few large narrative paintings.[71]

Picasso painted mostly from imagination or memory. According to William Rubin, Picasso "could only make great art from subjects that truly involved him ... Unlike Matisse, Picasso had eschewed models virtually all his mature life, preferring to paint individuals whose lives had both impinged on, and had real significance for, his own."[73] The art critic Arthur Danto said Picasso's work constitutes a "vast pictorial autobiography" that provides some basis for the popular conception that "Picasso invented a new style each time he fell in love with a new woman".[73] The autobiographical nature of Picasso's art is reinforced by his habit of dating his works, often to the day. He explained: "I want to leave to posterity a documentation that will be as complete as possible. That's why I put a date on everything I do."[73]
Artistic legacy

At the time of Picasso's death many of his paintings were in his possession, as he had kept off the art market what he did not need to sell. In addition, Picasso had a considerable collection of the work of other famous artists, some his contemporaries, such as Henri Matisse, with whom he had exchanged works. Since Picasso left no will, his death duties (estate tax) to the French state were paid in the form of his works and others from his collection. These works form the core of the immense and representative collection of the Musée Picasso in Paris. In 2003, relatives of Picasso inaugurated a museum dedicated to him in his birthplace, Málaga, Spain, the Museo Picasso Málaga.

The Museu Picasso in Barcelona features many of his early works, created while he was living in Spain, including many rarely seen works which reveal his firm grounding in classical techniques. The museum also holds many precise and detailed figure studies done in his youth under his father's tutelage, as well as the extensive collection of Jaime Sabartés, his close friend and personal secretary.

Several paintings by Picasso rank among the most expensive paintings in the world. Garçon à la pipe sold for US$104 million at Sotheby's on 4 May 2004, establishing a new price record. Dora Maar au Chat sold for US$95.2 million at Sotheby's on 3 May 2006.[74] On 4 May 2010, Nude, Green Leaves and Bust was sold at Christie's for $106.5 million. The 1932 work, which depicts Picasso's mistress Marie-Thérèse Walter reclining and as a bust, was in the personal collection of Los Angeles philanthropist Frances Lasker Brody, who died in November 2009.[75] On 11 May 2015 his painting Women of Algiers set the record for the highest price ever paid for a painting when it sold for US$179.3 million at Christie's in New York.[76]

As of 2004, Picasso remained the top-ranked artist (based on sales of his works at auctions) according to the Art Market Trends report.[77] More of his paintings have been stolen than any other artist's;[78] the Art Loss Register has 550 of his works listed as missing.[79]

The Picasso Administration functions as his official Estate. The US copyright representative for the Picasso Administration is the Artists Rights Society.[80]

In the 1996 movie Surviving Picasso, Picasso is portrayed by actor Anthony Hopkins.[81] Picasso is also a character in Steve Martin's 1993 play, Picasso at the Lapin Agile.
Recent major exhibitions

Picasso: Masterpieces from the Musée National Picasso, Paris, an exhibition of 150 paintings, sculptures, drawings, prints and photographs from the Musée National Picasso in Paris. The exhibit touring schedule includes:

    8 October 2010 – 17 January 2011, Seattle Art Museum, Seattle, Washington, US.
    19 February 2011 – 15 May 2011, Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, Richmond, Virginia, US.
    11 June 2011 – 9 October 2011, M. H. de Young Memorial Museum, San Francisco, California, US.[82]
    12 November 2011 – 25 March 2012, Art Gallery of New South Wales, Sydney.[83]
    28 April 2012 – 26 August 2012, Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

    Postage stamp, USSR, 1973. Picasso has been honoured on stamps worldwide.

    Musée Picasso, Paris (Hotel Salé, 1659)

    Museu Picasso is located in the gothic palaces of Montcada street in Barcelona

    Art Museum Pablo Picasso Münster Arkaden

See also
Book icon 	

    Book: Key artists

    Picasso's poetry
    Pierre Le Guennec
Victor Hugo
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Victor hugo)
For other uses, see Victor Hugo (disambiguation).
Victor Hugo
Victor Hugo by Étienne Carjat 1876 - full.jpg
Woodburytype of Victor Hugo by Étienne Carjat, 1876.
Born 	Victor Marie Hugo
26 February 1802
Besançon, Doubs, France
Died 	22 May 1885 (aged 83)
Paris, France
Resting place 	Panthéon, Paris, France
Occupation 	Writer, poet, politician
Nationality 	French
Period 	19th century
Genre 	Novel, dramaturgy, theatre, poetry, essay, drawing
Literary movement 	Romanticism
Notable works 	

    Hernani The Hunchback of Notre-Dame Ruy Blas Les Châtiments Les Contemplations La Légende des siècles Les Misérables Toilers of the Sea 

Years active 	1829–1883
Spouse 	Adèle Foucher
(m. 1822; her death 1868)
Children 	

    Léopold Victor Hugo
    Léopoldine Hugo
    Charles Hugo
    François-Victor Hugo
    Adèle Hugo

Signature 	

Victor Marie Hugo (/ˈhjuːɡoʊ/;[1] French: [viktɔʁ maʁi yɡo] ( listen); 26 February 1802 – 22 May 1885) was a French poet, novelist, and dramatist of the Romantic movement. He is considered one of the greatest and best-known French writers. In France, Hugo's literary fame comes first from his poetry and then from his novels and his dramatic achievements. Among many volumes of poetry, Les Contemplations and La Légende des siècles stand particularly high in critical esteem. Outside France, his best-known works are the novels Les Misérables, 1862, and Notre-Dame de Paris, 1831 (known in English as The Hunchback of Notre-Dame). He also produced more than 4,000 drawings, which have since been admired for their beauty, and earned widespread respect as a campaigner for social causes such as the abolition of capital punishment.

Though a committed royalist when he was young, Hugo's views changed as the decades passed, and he became a passionate supporter of republicanism;[2] his work touches upon most of the political and social issues and the artistic trends of his time. He is buried in the Panthéon. His legacy has been honoured in many ways, including his portrait being placed on French franc banknotes.

Contents

    1 Personal life
    2 Writings
    3 Political life and exile
    4 Religious views
    5 Victor Hugo and music
    6 Declining years and death
    7 Drawings
        7.1 Gallery
    8 Memorials
    9 Religious veneration
    10 Works
        10.1 Published during Hugo's lifetime
        10.2 Published posthumously
    11 References
    12 Further reading
    13 Further reading
    14 External links
        14.1 Online works

Personal life

Hugo was the third son of Joseph Léopold Sigisbert Hugo (1774–1828) and Sophie Trébuchet (1772–1821); his brothers were Abel Joseph Hugo (1798–1855) and Eugène Hugo (1800–1837). He was born in 1802 in Besançon in the western region of Franche-Comté. Léopold Hugo was a freethinking republican who considered Napoleon a hero; by contrast Sophie Hugo was a Catholic Royalist who was intimately involved with her possible lover General Victor Lahorie,[3] who was executed in 1812 for plotting against Napoleon.

Hugo's childhood was a period of national political turmoil. Napoleon was proclaimed Emperor of the French two years after Hugo's birth, and the Bourbon Monarchy was restored before his 13th birthday. The opposing political and religious views of Hugo's parents reflected the forces that would battle for supremacy in France throughout his life: Hugo's father was a high-ranking officer in Napoleon's army until he failed in Spain (one of the reasons why his name is not present on the Arc de Triomphe).

Since Hugo's father was an officer, the family moved frequently and Hugo learned much from these travels. On a childhood family trip to Naples, Hugo saw the vast Alpine passes and the snowy peaks, the magnificently blue Mediterranean, and Rome during its festivities.[4] Though he was only five years old at the time, he remembered the six-month-long trip vividly. They stayed in Naples for a few months and then headed back to Paris.

At the beginning of her marriage, Hugo's mother Sophie followed her husband to posts in Italy (where Léopold served as a governor of a province near Naples) and Spain (where he took charge of three Spanish provinces). Weary of the constant moving required by military life, and at odds with her husband's lack of Catholic beliefs, Sophie separated temporarily from Léopold in 1803 and settled in Paris with her children. Thereafter she dominated Hugo's education and upbringing. As a result, Hugo's early work in poetry and fiction reflect her passionate devotion to both King and Faith. It was only later, during the events leading up to France's 1848 Revolution, that he would begin to rebel against his Catholic Royalist education and instead champion Republicanism and Freethought.

Young Victor fell in love and, against his mother's wishes, became secretly engaged to his childhood friend Adèle Foucher (1803–1868). Because of his close relationship with his mother, Hugo waited until after her death (in 1821) to marry Adèle in 1822.

Adèle and Victor Hugo had their first child, Léopold, in 1823, but the boy died in infancy. The following year, on 28 August 1824, the couple's second child, Léopoldine was born, followed by Charles on 4 November 1826, François-Victor on 28 October 1828, and Adèle on 24 August 1830.
Illustration by Luc-Olivier Merson for Notre-Dame de Paris (1881), showing the recently restored galerie des chimères.

Hugo's oldest and favourite daughter, Léopoldine, died at age 19 in 1843, shortly after her marriage to Charles Vacquerie. On 4 September 1843, she drowned in the Seine at Villequier, pulled down by her heavy skirts, when a boat overturned. Her young husband also died trying to save her. The death left her father devastated; Hugo was travelling with his mistress at the time in the south of France, and first learned about Léopoldine's death from a newspaper he read in a café.[5]

He describes his shock and grief in his famous poem À Villequier:

Hélas ! vers le passé tournant un œil d'envie,
Sans que rien ici-bas puisse m'en consoler,
Je regarde toujours ce moment de ma vie
Où je l'ai vue ouvrir son aile et s'envoler!

Je verrai cet instant jusqu'à ce que je meure,
L'instant, pleurs superflus !
Où je criai : L'enfant que j'avais tout à l'heure,
Quoi donc ! je ne l'ai plus !

Alas! turning an envious eye towards the past,
inconsolable by anything on earth,
I keep looking at that moment of my life
when I saw her open her wings and fly away!

I will see that instant until I die,
that instant—too much for tears!
when I cried out: "The child that I had just now—
what! I don't have her any more!"

He wrote many poems afterwards about his daughter's life and death, and at least one biographer claims he never completely recovered from it.[citation needed] His most famous poem is probably Demain, dès l'aube, in which he describes visiting her grave.

Hugo decided to live in exile after Napoleon III's coup d'état at the end of 1851. After leaving France, Hugo lived in Brussels briefly in 1851, before moving to the Channel Islands, first to Jersey (1852–1855) and then to the smaller island of Guernsey in 1855, where he stayed until Napoleon III's fall from power in 1870. Although Napoleon III proclaimed a general amnesty in 1859, under which Hugo could have safely returned to France, the author stayed in exile, only returning when Napoleon III was forced from power as a result of the French defeat in the Franco-Prussian War in 1870. After the Siege of Paris from 1870 to 71, Hugo lived again in Guernsey from 1872 to 1873, before finally returning to France for the remainder of his life.
Writings
Victor Hugo in 1853

Hugo published his first novel the year following his marriage (Han d'Islande, 1823), and his second three years later (Bug-Jargal, 1826). Between 1829 and 1840, he published five more volumes of poetry (Les Orientales, 1829; Les Feuilles d'automne, 1831; Les Chants du crépuscule, 1835; Les Voix intérieures, 1837; and Les Rayons et les ombres, 1840), cementing his reputation as one of the greatest elegiac and lyric poets of his time.

Like many young writers of his generation, Hugo was profoundly influenced by François-René de Chateaubriand, the famous figure in the literary movement of Romanticism and France's pre-eminent literary figure during the early 19th century. In his youth, Hugo resolved to be "Chateaubriand or nothing", and his life would come to parallel that of his predecessor in many ways. Like Chateaubriand, Hugo furthered the cause of Romanticism, became involved in politics (though mostly as a champion of Republicanism), and was forced into exile due to his political stances.

The precocious passion and eloquence of Hugo's early work brought success and fame at an early age. His first collection of poetry (Odes et poésies diverses) was published in 1822, when Hugo was only 20 years old, and earned him a royal pension from Louis XVIII. Though the poems were admired for their spontaneous fervour and fluency, the collection that followed four years later in 1826 (Odes et Ballades) revealed Hugo to be a great poet, a natural master of lyric and creative song.

Victor Hugo's first mature work of fiction appeared in 1829, and reflected the acute social conscience that would infuse his later work. Le Dernier jour d'un condamné (The Last Day of a Condemned Man) would have a profound influence on later writers such as Albert Camus, Charles Dickens, and Fyodor Dostoevsky. Claude Gueux, a documentary short story about a real-life murderer who had been executed in France, appeared in 1834, and was later considered by Hugo himself to be a precursor to his great work on social injustice, Les Misérables.

Hugo became the figurehead of the romantic literary movement with the plays Cromwell (1827) and Hernani (1830).[6]

Hugo's novel Notre-Dame de Paris (The Hunchback of Notre-Dame) was published in 1831 and quickly translated into other languages across Europe. One of the effects of the novel was to shame the City of Paris into restoring the much-neglected Cathedral of Notre Dame, which was attracting thousands of tourists who had read the popular novel. The book also inspired a renewed appreciation for pre-Renaissance buildings, which thereafter began to be actively preserved.
Portrait of "Cosette" by Émile Bayard, from the original edition of Les Misérables (1862)

Hugo began planning a major novel about social misery and injustice as early as the 1830s, but a full 17 years were needed for Les Misérables to be realised and finally published in 1862. Hugo was acutely aware of the quality of the novel[clarification needed] and publication of the work went to the highest bidder. The Belgian publishing house Lacroix and Verboeckhoven undertook a marketing campaign unusual for the time, issuing press releases about the work a full six months before the launch. It also initially published only the first part of the novel ("Fantine"), which was launched simultaneously in major cities. Instalments of the book sold out within hours, and had enormous impact on French society.

The critical establishment was generally hostile to the novel; Taine found it insincere, Barbey d'Aurevilly complained of its vulgarity, Gustave Flaubert found within it "neither truth nor greatness", the Goncourt brothers lambasted its artificiality, and Baudelaire – despite giving favourable reviews in newspapers – castigated it in private as "tasteless and inept". Les Misérables proved popular enough with the masses that the issues it highlighted were soon on the agenda of the National Assembly of France. Today, the novel remains his most enduringly popular work. It is popular worldwide, and has been adapted for cinema, television, and stage shows.

An apocryphal tale[7] about the shortest correspondence in history is said to have been between Hugo and his publisher Hurst and Blackett in 1862. Hugo was on vacation when Les Misérables was published. He queried the reaction to the work by sending a single-character telegram to his publisher, asking ?. The publisher replied with a single ! to indicate its success.[8]

Hugo turned away from social/political issues in his next novel, Les Travailleurs de la Mer (Toilers of the Sea), published in 1866. The book was well received, perhaps due to the previous success of Les Misérables. Dedicated to the channel island of Guernsey, where he spent 15 years of exile, Hugo tells of a man who attempts to win the approval of his beloved's father by rescuing his ship, intentionally marooned by its captain who hopes to escape with a treasure of money it is transporting, through an exhausting battle of human engineering against the force of the sea and a battle against an almost mythical beast of the sea, a giant squid. Superficially an adventure, one of Hugo's biographers calls it a "metaphor for the 19th century–technical progress, creative genius and hard work overcoming the immanent evil of the material world."[9]

The word used in Guernsey to refer to squid (pieuvre, also sometimes applied to octopus) was to enter the French language as a result of its use in the book. Hugo returned to political and social issues in his next novel, L'Homme Qui Rit (The Man Who Laughs), which was published in 1869 and painted a critical picture of the aristocracy. The novel was not as successful as his previous efforts, and Hugo himself began to comment on the growing distance between himself and literary contemporaries such as Flaubert and Émile Zola, whose realist and naturalist novels were now exceeding the popularity of his own work.

His last novel, Quatre-vingt-treize (Ninety-Three), published in 1874, dealt with a subject that Hugo had previously avoided: the Reign of Terror during the French Revolution. Though Hugo's popularity was on the decline at the time of its publication, many now consider Ninety-Three to be a work on par with Hugo's better-known novels.
Political life and exile
Part of a series on
Liberalism
Yellow flag waving.svg
Schools
[show]
Ideas
[show]
Variants
[show]
People
[show]
Organizations
[show]

    Portal icon Liberalism portal
    Portal icon Politics portal

    v t e 

Among the Rocks on Jersey (1853–55).

After three unsuccessful attempts, Hugo was finally elected to the Académie française in 1841, solidifying his position in the world of French arts and letters. A group of French academicians, particularly Etienne de Jouy, were fighting against the "romantic evolution" and had managed to delay Victor Hugo's election.[10] Thereafter he became increasingly involved in French politics.

He was elevated to the peerage by King Louis-Philippe in 1841 and entered the Higher Chamber as a pair de France, where he spoke against the death penalty and social injustice, and in favour of freedom of the press and self-government for Poland.

In 1848, Hugo was elected to the Parliament as a conservative. In 1849 he broke with the conservatives when he gave a noted speech calling for the end of misery and poverty. Other speeches called for universal suffrage and free education for all children. Hugo's advocacy to abolish the death penalty was renowned internationally.

These parliamentary speeches are published in Œuvres complètes: actes et paroles I : avant l'exil, 1841–1851. Scroll down to the Assemblée Constituante 1848 heading and subsequent pages.[11]

When Louis Napoleon (Napoleon III) seized complete power in 1851, establishing an anti-parliamentary constitution, Hugo openly declared him a traitor to France. He relocated to Brussels, then Jersey, from which he was expelled for supporting a Jersey newspaper that had criticised Queen Victoria and finally settled with his family at Hauteville House in Saint Peter Port, Guernsey, where he would live in exile from October 1855 until 1870.

While in exile, Hugo published his famous political pamphlets against Napoleon III, Napoléon le Petit and Histoire d'un crime. The pamphlets were banned in France, but nonetheless had a strong impact there. He also composed or published some of his best work during his period in Guernsey, including Les Misérables, and three widely praised collections of poetry (Les Châtiments, 1853; Les Contemplations, 1856; and La Légende des siècles, 1859).

He convinced the British government to spare the lives of six Irish people convicted of terrorist activities and his influence was credited in the removal of the death penalty from the constitutions of Geneva, Portugal and Colombia.[12] He had also pleaded for Benito Juárez to spare the recently captured emperor Maximilian I of Mexico but to no avail. His complete archives (published by Pauvert) show also that he wrote a letter asking the USA, for the sake of their own reputation in the future, to spare John Brown's life, but the letter arrived after Brown was executed.

Although Napoleon III granted an amnesty to all political exiles in 1859, Hugo declined, as it meant he would have to curtail his criticisms of the government. It was only after Napoleon III fell from power and the Third Republic was proclaimed that Hugo finally returned to his homeland in 1870, where he was promptly elected to the National Assembly and the Senate.

He was in Paris during the siege by the Prussian army in 1870, famously eating animals given to him by the Paris zoo. As the siege continued, and food became ever more scarce, he wrote in his diary that he was reduced to "eating the unknown".[13]

Because of his concern for the rights of artists and copyright, he was a founding member of the Association Littéraire et Artistique Internationale, which led to the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works. However, in Pauvert's published archives, he states strongly that "any work of art has two authors : the people who confusingly feel something, a creator who translates these feelings, and the people again who consecrate his vision of that feeling. When one of the authors dies, the rights should totally be granted back to the other, the people".
Religious views
Marble bust of Victor Hugo by Auguste Rodin.

Hugo's religious views changed radically over the course of his life. In his youth and under the inflence of his mother, he identified as a Catholic and professed respect for Church hierarchy and authority. From there he became a non-practicing Catholic, and increasingly expressed anti-Catholic and anti-clerical views. He frequented spiritism during his exile (where he participated also in many séances conducted by Madame Delphine de Girardin),[14][15] and in later years settled into a rationalist deism similar to that espoused by Voltaire. A census-taker asked Hugo in 1872 if he was a Catholic, and he replied, "No. A Freethinker".[16]

After 1872, Hugo never lost his antipathy towards the Catholic Church. He felt the Church was indifferent to the plight of the working class under the oppression of the monarchy. Perhaps he also was upset by the frequency with which his work appeared on the Church's list of banned books. Hugo counted 740 attacks on Les Misérables in the Catholic press.[17] When Hugo's sons Charles and François-Victor died, he insisted that they be buried without a crucifix or priest. In his will, he made the same stipulation about his own death and funeral.[18]

Hugo's rationalism can be found in poems such as Torquemada (1869, about religious fanaticism), The Pope (1878, anti-clerical), Religions and Religion (1880, denying the usefulness of churches) and, published posthumously, The End of Satan and God (1886 and 1891 respectively, in which he represents Christianity as a griffin and rationalism as an angel). Vincent van Gogh ascribed the saying "Religions pass away, but God remains", actually by Jules Michelet, to Hugo.[19]
Victor Hugo and music
Photogravure of Victor Hugo, 1883.

Although Hugo's many talents did not include exceptional musical ability, he nevertheless had a great impact on the music world through the inspiration that his works provided for composers of the 19th and 20th century. Hugo himself particularly enjoyed the music of Gluck and Weber. In Les Misérables he calls the huntsman's chorus in Weber's Euryanthe, "perhaps the most beautiful piece of music ever composed".[20] He also greatly admired Beethoven, and rather unusually for his time, he also appreciated works by composers from earlier centuries such as Palestrina and Monteverdi.[21]

Two famous musicians of the 19th century were friends of Hugo: Hector Berlioz and Franz Liszt. The latter played Beethoven in Hugo's home, and Hugo joked in a letter to a friend that, thanks to Liszt's piano lessons, he learned how to play a favourite song on the piano – with only one finger. Hugo also worked with composer Louise Bertin, writing the libretto for her 1836 opera La Esmeralda, which was based on the character in The Hunchback of Notre Dame.[21] Although for various reasons the opera closed soon after its fifth performance and is little known today, it has enjoyed a modern revival, both in a piano/song concert version by Liszt at the Festival international Victor Hugo et Égaux 2007[22] and in a full orchestral version presented in July 2008 at Le Festival de Radio France et Montpellier Languedoc-Roussillon.[23]

Well over one thousand musical compositions have been inspired by Hugo's works from the 19th century until the present day. In particular, Hugo's plays, in which he rejected the rules of classical theatre in favour of romantic drama, attracted the interest of many composers who adapted them into operas. More than one hundred operas are based on Hugo's works and among them are Donizetti's Lucrezia Borgia (1833), Verdi's Rigoletto (1851) and Ernani (1844), and Ponchielli's La Gioconda (1876).[24]

Hugo's novels as well as his plays have been a great source of inspiration for musicians, stirring them to create not only opera and ballet but musical theatre such as Notre-Dame de Paris and the ever-popular Les Misérables, London West End's longest running musical. Additionally, Hugo's beautiful poems have attracted an exceptional amount of interest from musicians, and numerous melodies have been based on his poetry by composers such as Berlioz, Bizet, Fauré, Franck, Lalo, Liszt, Massenet, Saint-Saëns, Rachmaninoff and Wagner.[24]

Today, Hugo's work continues to stimulate musicians to create new compositions. For example, Hugo's novel against capital punishment, The Last Day of a Condemned Man, was adapted into an opera by David Alagna, with a libretto by Frédérico Alagna and premièred by their brother, tenor Roberto Alagna, in 2007.[25] In Guernsey, every two years the Victor Hugo International Music Festival attracts a wide range of musicians and the premiere of songs specially commissioned from such composers as Guillaume Connesson, Richard Dubugnon, Olivier Kaspar and Thierry Escaich and based on Hugo's poetry.

Remarkably, not only Hugo's literary production has been the source of inspiration for musical works, but also his political writings have received attention from musicians and have been adapted to music. For instance, in 2009 Italian composer Matteo Sommacal was commissioned by Festival "Bagliori d'autore" and wrote a piece for speaker and chamber ensemble entitled Actes et paroles, with a text elaborated by Chiara Piola Caselli after Victor Hugo's last political speech addressed to the Assemblée législative, "Sur la Revision de la Constitution" (18 July 1851),[26] and premiered in Rome on 19 November 2009 in the auditorium of the Institut français, Centre Saint-Louis, French Embassy to the Holy See, by Piccola Accademia degli Specchi featuring the composer Matthias Kadar.[27]
Declining years and death
Hugo on his deathbed, 1885
Catafalque below the Arc de Triomphe in Paris, 1 June 1885
Tomb of Victor Hugo at the Panthéon

When Hugo returned to Paris in 1870, the country hailed him as a national hero. Despite his popularity Hugo lost his bid for re-election to the National Assembly in 1872. Within a brief period, he suffered a mild stroke, his daughter Adèle was interned in an insane asylum, and his two sons died. (Adèle's biography inspired the movie The Story of Adele H.) His wife Adèle had died in 1868.

His faithful mistress, Juliette Drouet, died in 1883, only two years before his own death. Despite his personal loss, Hugo remained committed to the cause of political change. On 30 January 1876, Hugo was elected to the newly created Senate. This last phase of his political career was considered a failure. Hugo was a maverick and got little done in the Senate.

Hugo suffered a mild stroke on 27 June 1878.[28][29] In February 1881 Hugo celebrated his 79th birthday. To honour the fact that he was entering his 80th year, one of the greatest tributes to a living writer was held. The celebrations began on 25 June when Hugo was presented with a Sèvres vase, the traditional gift for sovereigns. On 27 June, one of the largest parades in French history was held.

Marchers stretched from the Avenue d'Eylau, where the author was living, down the Champs-Élysées, and all the way to the centre of Paris. The paraders marched for six hours past Hugo as he sat at the window at his house. Every inch and detail of the event was for Hugo; the official guides even wore cornflowers as an allusion to Fantine's song in Les Misérables. On 28 June, the city of Paris changed the name of the Avenue d'Eylau to Avenue Victor-Hugo.[30] Letters addressed to the author were from then on labelled "To Mister Victor Hugo, In his avenue, Paris".

Victor Hugo's death from pneumonia on 22 May 1885, at the age of 83, generated intense national mourning. He was not only revered as a towering figure in literature, he was a statesman who shaped the Third Republic and democracy in France. More than two million people joined his funeral procession in Paris from the Arc de Triomphe to the Panthéon, where he was buried. He shares a crypt within the Panthéon with Alexandre Dumas and Émile Zola. Most large French towns and cities have a street named after him.

Hugo left five sentences as his last will, to be officially published:

Je donne cinquante mille francs aux pauvres. Je veux être enterré dans leur corbillard.
Je refuse l'oraison de toutes les Églises. Je demande une prière à toutes les âmes.
Je crois en Dieu.

"I leave 50,000 francs to the poor. I want to be buried in their hearse.
I refuse [funeral] orations of all churches. I beg a prayer to all souls.
I believe in God."
Drawings

Hugo produced more than 4,000 drawings. Originally pursued as a casual hobby, drawing became more important to Hugo shortly before his exile, when he made the decision to stop writing to devote himself to politics. Drawing became his exclusive creative outlet during the period 1848–1851.

Hugo worked only on paper, and on a small scale; usually in dark brown or black pen-and-ink wash, sometimes with touches of white, and rarely with colour. The surviving drawings are surprisingly accomplished and "modern" in their style and execution, foreshadowing the experimental techniques of Surrealism and Abstract Expressionism.

He would not hesitate to use his children's stencils, ink blots, puddles and stains, lace impressions, "pliage" or folding (i.e. Rorschach blots), "grattage" or rubbing, often using the charcoal from match sticks or his fingers instead of pen or brush. Sometimes he would even toss in coffee or soot to get the effects he wanted. It is reported that Hugo often drew with his left hand or without looking at the page, or during Spiritualist séances, to access his unconscious mind, a concept only later popularised by Sigmund Freud.

Hugo kept his artwork out of the public eye, fearing it would overshadow his literary work. However, he enjoyed sharing his drawings with his family and friends, often in the form of ornately handmade calling cards, many of which were given as gifts to visitors when he was in political exile. Some of his work was shown to, and appreciated by, contemporary artists such as van Gogh and Delacroix; the latter expressed the opinion that if Hugo had decided to become a painter instead of a writer, he would have outshone the artists of their century.
Gallery

    Crépuscule ("Twilight"), Jersey, 1853–1855.

    Ville avec le pont de Tumbledown, ("Town with Tumbledown Bridge"),1847.

    Pieuvre avec les initiales V.H., ("Octopus with the initials V.H."), 1866.

    Le Rocher de l'Ermitage dans un paysage imaginaire ("Ermitage Rock in an imaginary landscape")

    Gavroche a onze ans, ("Gavroche is eleven years old").

Memorials
The banknote of 5 New Francs 1959 of the French national bank Banque de France honouring Victor Hugo, with a view of his burial place the Panthéon in Paris, and the Place des Vosges in Paris where he used to live.
Avenue Victor-Hugo in Paris.

The people of Guernsey erected a statue by sculptor Jean Boucher in Candie Gardens (Saint Peter Port) to commemorate his stay in the islands. The City of Paris has preserved his residences Hauteville House, Guernsey and 6, Place des Vosges, Paris as museums. The house where he stayed in Vianden, Luxembourg, in 1871 has also become a commemorative museum.

Hugo is venerated as a saint in the Vietnamese religion of Cao Đài, in the front hall of the Holy See in Tay Ninh.[31][32]

The Avenue Victor-Hugo in the 16th arrondissement of Paris bears Hugo's name, and links the Place de l'Étoile to the vicinity of the Bois de Boulogne by way of the Place Victor-Hugo. This square is served by a Paris Métro stop also named in his honour. In the town of Béziers, there is a main street, a school, hospital and several cafés named after Victor Hugo. There are a number of streets and avenues throughout France named after Victor Hugo. The school Lycée Victor Hugo was founded in his town of birth, Besançon in France. Avenue Victor-Hugo, located in Shawinigan, Quebec, was named to honour him.

In the city of Avellino, Italy, Victor Hugo lived briefly stayed in what is now known as Il Palazzo Culturale, when reuniting with his father, Leopold Sigisbert Hugo, in 1808. Hugo would later write about his brief stay here quoting "C'était un palais de marbre..." ("It was a palace of marble").

Victor Hugo is the namesake of the city of Hugoton, Kansas.[33]

In Havana, Cuba there is a park named after him and bust of Hugo stands near the entrance of the Old Summer Palace in Beijing.

A mosaic commemorating Victor Hugo is located on the ceiling of the Thomas Jefferson Building of the Library of Congress.
Religious veneration

Thanks to his contribution to mankind, his virtues, and belief in God, he is venerated as a saint in Cao Đài, a new religion established in Vietnam in 1926. According to religious records, he was assigned by God to lead the foreign mission as part of God's Divine hierarchy. He represented mankind, along with the major Saints Sun Yat Sen and Trạng Trình Nguyễn Bỉnh Khiêm, to sign a religious pact with God, promising to lead mankind to "Love and Justice" ("Amour et Justice").

Here is an excerpt of his teaching about heaven:

In all heavens, beauty reigns,
Its beings possess much of divinity.
Peace and harmony rule these realms,
Their beings know not the word 'war'.[34]
Works
French literature
by category
French literary history

    Medieval Renaissance 17th 18th 19th 20th century Contemporary 

French writers

    Chronological list Writers by category Essayists Novelists Playwrights Poets Short story writers Children's writers 

Portals

    France French language Literature French/Francophone literature 

    v t e 

Victor Hugo cabinet card by London Stereoscopic Company
1952 Soviet Union postage stamp.
Ceiling mosaic, Library of Congress
Published during Hugo's lifetime

    Cromwell preface only (1819)
    Odes et poésies diverses (1822)
    Odes (1823)
    Han d'Islande (1823), (Hans of Iceland)
    Nouvelles Odes (1824)
    Bug-Jargal (1826)
    Odes et Ballades (1826), (Odes and Ballads)
    Cromwell (1827)
    Les Orientales (1829), (Orientalia)
    Le Dernier jour d'un condamné (1829), (The Last Day of a Condemned Man)
    Hernani (1830)
    Notre-Dame de Paris (1831), (The Hunchback of Notre-Dame)
    Marion Delorme (1831)
    Les Feuilles d'automne (1831), (Autumn Leaves)
    Le roi s'amuse (1832)
    Lucrezia Borgia (1833)
    Marie Tudor (1833)
    Littérature et philosophie mêlées (1834), (A Blend of Literature and Philosophy)
    Claude Gueux (1834)
    Angelo, Tyrant of Padua (1835)
    Les Chants du crépuscule (1835), (Songs of the Half Light)
    La Esmeralda (only libretto of an opera written by Victor Hugo himself) (1836)
    Les Voix intérieures (1837)
    Ruy Blas (1838)
    Les Rayons et les ombres (1840)
    Le Rhin (1842)
    Les Burgraves (1843)
    Napoléon le Petit (1852), (Napoleon the Little)
    Les Châtiments (1853)
    Les Contemplations (1856), (The Contemplations)
    Les TRYNE (1856)
    La Légende des siècles (1859), (The Legend of the Ages)
    Les Misérables (1862)
    William Shakespeare (1864)
    Les Chansons des rues et des bois (1865), (Songs of Street and Wood)
    Les Travailleurs de la Mer (1866), (Toilers of the Sea)
    La voix de Guernsey (1867)
    L'Homme qui rit (1869), (The Man Who Laughs)
    L'Année terrible (1872)
    Quatrevingt-treize (Ninety-Three) (1874)
    Mes Fils (1874)
    Actes et paroles – Avant l'exil (1875)
    Actes et paroles – Pendant l'exil (1875), (Deeds and Words)
    Actes et paroles – Depuis l'exil (1876)
    La Légende des Siècles 2e série (1877)
    L'Art d'être grand-père (1877), (The Art of Being a Grandfather)
    Histoire d'un crime 1re partie (1877), (History of a Crime)
    Histoire d'un crime 2e partie (1878)
    Le Pape (1878)
    La pitié suprême (1879)
    Religions et religion (1880), (Religions and Religion)
    L'Âne (1880)
    Les Quatres vents de l'esprit (1881), (The Four Winds of the Spirit)
    Torquemada (1882)
    La Légende des siècles Tome III (1883)
    L'Archipel de la Manche (1883)

Poems of Victor Hugo
Published posthumously

    Théâtre en liberté (1886)
    La Fin de Satan (1886)
    Choses vues (1887)
    Toute la lyre (1888), (The Whole Lyre)
    Amy Robsart (1889)
    Les Jumeaux (1889)
    Actes et Paroles – Depuis l'exil, 1876–1885 (1889)
    Alpes et Pyrénées (1890), (Alps and Pyrenees)
    Dieu (1891)
    France et Belgique (1892)
    Toute la lyre – dernière série (1893)
    Les fromages (1895)
    Correspondences – Tome I (1896)
    Correspondences – Tome II (1898)
    Les années funestes (1898)
    Choses vues – nouvelle série (1900)
    Post-scriptum de ma vie (1901)
    Dernière Gerbe (1902)
    Mille francs de récompense (1934)
    Océan. Tas de pierres (1942)
    L'Intervention (1951)
    Conversations with Eternity (1998)

References

"Hugo". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
"Victor Hugo" Retrieved 22 June 2015
Behr, Edward (1993). The Complete Book of Les Misérables. Arcade Publishing. p. 8.
Josephson, Mattthew (2006). Victor Hugo: A Realistic Biography of the Great Romantic. Jorge Pinto Books, Inc. p. 4.
Victor Hugo, tome 1: Je suis une force qui va by Max Gallo, pub. Broché (2001)
State Library of Victoria. "Victor Hugo: Les Misérables – From Page to Stage research guide".
Garson O'Toole, "Briefest Correspondence: Question Mark? Exclamation Mark!" (14 June 2014).
Norris McWhirter (1981). Guinness Book of World Records: 1981 Edition. Bantam Books, p. 216.
Robb, Graham (1997). Victor Hugo: A Biography. W.W. Norton & Company. p. 414.
On the role of E. de Jouy against V.Hugo, see Les aventures militaires, littéraires et autres de Etienne de Jouy de l'Académie française by Michel Faul (Editions Seguier, France, 2009 ISBN 978-2-84049-556-7)
"Victor Hugo: Les Misérables – From Page to Stage research guide". State Library of Victoria.
"Victor Hugo, l'homme océan". Bibliothèque nationale de France. Retrieved 19 July 2012.
"Victor Hugo's diary tells how Parisians dined on zoo animals". The Spokesman-Review (Spokane, Washington). 7 February 1915. p. 3.
Malgras, J. (1906). Les Pionniers du Spiritisme en France: Documents pour la formation d'un livre d'Or des Sciences Psychiques. Paris.
Chez Victor Hugo. Les tables tournantes de Jersey. Extracts from meeting minutes published by Gustave Simon in 1923
Gjelten, Tom (2008). Bacardi and the Long Fight for Cuba. Penguin. p. 48.
Robb, Graham (1997). Victor Hugo. London: Picador. p. 32.
Petrucelli, Alan (2009). Morbid Curiosity: The Disturbing Demises of the Famous and Infamous. Penguin. p. 152.
"Vincent van Gogh to Theo van Gogh. The Hague, between about Wednesday, 13 & about Monday, 18 December 1882". Van Gogh Museum. Retrieved 31 January 2012.
Hugo, V., Les misérables, Volume 2, Penguin Books, 1 December 1980, p.103.
"Hugo à l'Opéra", ed. Arnaud Laster, L'Avant-Scène Opéra, no. 208 (2002).
Cette page utilise des cadres. Festival international Victor Hugo et Égaux. Retrieved 19 July 2012.
23 juillet at the Wayback Machine (archived 9 May 2008)
"Hugo et la musique" in Pleins feux sur Victor Hugo, Arnaud Laster, Comédie-Française (1981)
"Festival Victor Hugo & Egaux 2008".
V. Hugo, Actes et paroles: Avant l'exile, 1875, Discours à l’Assemblée législative 1849-1851, J. Hetzel, Maison Quantin, Paris, 1875
C. Pulsoni, "L'orazione di Victor Hugo trasformata in musica", Il Corriere dell'Umbria, Vivere d'Umbria, Perugia (IT), November 19, 2009
Robb, Graham Victor Hugo (1997) p. 506
Liukkonen, Petri. "Victor Hugo". Books and Writers (kirjasto.sci.fi). Finland: Kuusankoski Public Library. Archived from the original on 10 February 2015.
Acte de décès de Victor Hugo
Hoskins, Janet Alison (2015). The Divine Eye and the Diaspora: Vietnamese Syncretism Becomes Transpacific Caodaism. pp. 2, 10, 36–37, 99–103, 189–190. ISBN 978-0-8248-5140-8.
"Caodaism: A Vietnamese-centred religion". Retrieved 8 May 2009.
Gannett, Henry (1905). The Origin of Certain Place Names in the United States. United States Government Publishing Office. p. 163.
Gobron, Gabriel. History and Philosophy of Vietnam. Wildside Press. p. 53. ISBN 1434462846.
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Goethe)
"Goethe" and "Göte" redirect here. For other uses, see Goethe (disambiguation) and Gote (disambiguation).
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Goethe (Stieler 1828).jpg
Goethe in 1828
Born 	28 August 1749
Frankfurt-am-Main, Holy Roman Empire
Died 	22 March 1832 (aged 82)
Weimar, Grand Duchy of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, German Confederation
Occupation 	Poet, novelist, playwright, natural philosopher, diplomat, civil servant
Nationality 	German
Literary movement 	Sturm und Drang; Weimar Classicism
Notable works 	Faust; The Sorrows of Young Werther; Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship; Elective Affinities; "Prometheus"; Zur Farbenlehre; Italienische Reise; Westöstlicher Diwan
Spouse 	Christiane Vulpius (1806–16, her death)
Signature 	

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (/ˈɡətə/;[1] German: [ˈjoːhan ˈvɔlfɡaŋ ˈɡøːtə] ( listen); 28 August 1749 – 22 March 1832) was a German writer and statesman. His body of work includes epic and lyric poetry written in a variety of metres and styles; prose and verse dramas; memoirs; an autobiography; literary and aesthetic criticism; treatises on botany, anatomy, and colour; and four novels. In addition, numerous literary and scientific fragments, more than 10,000 letters, and nearly 3,000 drawings by him are extant. A literary celebrity by the age of 25, Goethe was ennobled by the Duke of Saxe-Weimar, Karl August in 1782 after first taking up residence there in November 1775 following the success of his first novel, The Sorrows of Young Werther. He was an early participant in the Sturm und Drang literary movement. During his first ten years in Weimar, Goethe served as a member of the Duke's privy council, sat on the war and highway commissions, oversaw the reopening of silver mines in nearby Ilmenau, and implemented a series of administrative reforms at the University of Jena. He also contributed to the planning of Weimar's botanical park and the rebuilding of its Ducal Palace, which in 1998 were together designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site.[2]

After returning from a tour of Italy in 1788, his first major scientific work, the Metamorphosis of Plants, was published. In 1791 he was made managing director of the theatre at Weimar, and in 1794 he began a friendship with the dramatist, historian, and philosopher Friedrich Schiller, whose plays he premiered until Schiller's death in 1805. During this period Goethe published his second novel, Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship, the verse epic Hermann and Dorothea, and, in 1808, the first part of his most celebrated drama, Faust. His conversations and various common undertakings throughout the 1790s with Schiller, Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Johann Gottfried Herder, Alexander von Humboldt, Wilhelm von Humboldt, and August and Friedrich Schlegel have, in later years, been collectively termed Weimar Classicism.

Arthur Schopenhauer cited Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship as one of the four greatest novels ever written, along with Tristram Shandy, La Nouvelle Héloïse, and Don Quixote,[3] and Ralph Waldo Emerson selected Goethe as one of six "representative men" in his work of the same name, along with Plato, Napoleon, and William Shakespeare. Goethe's comments and observations form the basis of several biographical works, most notably Johann Peter Eckermann's Conversations with Goethe. There are frequent references to Goethe's writings throughout the works of Georg Friedrich Wilhelm Hegel, Arthur Schopenhauer, Søren Kierkegaard, Friedrich Nietzsche, Hermann Hesse, Thomas Mann, Sigmund Freud, and Carl Jung. Goethe's poems were set to music throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries by a number of composers, including Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Ludwig van Beethoven, Franz Schubert, Robert Schumann, Johannes Brahms, Charles Gounod, Richard Wagner, Hugo Wolf, Felix Mendelssohn, Hector Berlioz, Gustav Mahler, and Jules Massenet.

Contents

    1 Biography
        1.1 Early life
        1.2 Legal career
        1.3 Early years in Weimar
        1.4 Italy
        1.5 Weimar
        1.6 Later life
        1.7 Death
    2 Literary work
    3 Scientific work
    4 Eroticism
    5 Religion and politics
    6 Influence
    7 Bibliography
    8 See also
    9 References
    10 External links

Biography
Early life

Goethe's father, Johann Caspar Goethe, lived with his family in a large house in Frankfurt, then an Imperial Free City of the Holy Roman Empire. Though he had studied law in Leipzig and had been appointed Imperial Councillor, he was not involved in the city's official affairs.[4] 38-year-old Johann Caspar married Goethe's mother, Catharina Elizabeth Textor, the daughter of the mayor of Frankfurt Johann Wolfgang Textor and his wife Anna Margaretha Lindheimer, when she was 17 at Frankfurt on 20 August 1748. All their children, except for Goethe and his sister, Cornelia Friederike Christiana, who was born in 1750, died at early ages.
Goethe's birthplace in Frankfurt, Germany (Großer Hirschgraben)

His father and private tutors gave Goethe lessons in all the common subjects of their time, especially languages (Latin, Greek, French, Italian, English and Hebrew). Goethe also received lessons in dancing, riding and fencing. Johann Caspar, feeling frustrated in his own ambitions, was determined that his children should have all those advantages that he had not.[4]

His great passion was drawing. Goethe quickly became interested in literature; Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock and Homer were among his early favourites. He had a lively devotion to theatre as well and was greatly fascinated by puppet shows that were annually arranged in his home; a familiar theme in Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship.

He also took great pleasure in reading from the great works about history and religion. He writes about this period:

    I had from childhood the singular habit of always learning by heart the beginnings of books, and the divisions of a work, first of the five books of Moses, and then of the 'Aeneid' and Ovid's 'Metamorphoses'. . . If an ever busy imagination, of which that tale may bear witness, led me hither and thither, if the medley of fable and history, mythology and religion, threatened to bewilder me, I readily fled to those oriental regions, plunged into the first books of Moses, and there, amid the scattered shepherd tribes, found myself at once in the greatest solitude and the greatest society.[5]

Goethe became acquainted with Frankfurt actors.[6] Around early literary attempts, he was infatuated with Gretchen, who would later reappear in his Faust and the adventures with whom he would concisely describe in Dichtung und Wahrheit.[7] He adored Charitas Meixner (27 July 1750 – 31 December 1773), a wealthy Worms trader's daughter and friend of his sister, who would later marry the merchant G. F. Schuler.[8]
Legal career
Anna Katharina (Käthchen) Schönkopf

Goethe studied law in Leipzig from 1765 to 1768. He detested learning age-old judicial rules by heart, preferring instead to attend the poetry lessons of Christian Fürchtegott Gellert. In Leipzig, Goethe fell in love with Anna Katharina Schönkopf and wrote cheerful verses about her in the Rococo genre. In 1770, he anonymously released Annette, his first collection of poems. His uncritical admiration for many contemporary poets vanished as he became interested in Gotthold Ephraim Lessing and Christoph Martin Wieland. Already at this time, Goethe wrote a good deal, but he threw away nearly all of these works, except for the comedy Die Mitschuldigen. The restaurant Auerbachs Keller and its legend of Faust's 1525 barrel ride impressed him so much that Auerbachs Keller became the only real place in his closet drama Faust Part One. As his studies did not progress, Goethe was forced to return to Frankfurt at the close of August 1768.

Goethe became severely ill in Frankfurt. During the year and a half that followed, because of several relapses, the relationship with his father worsened. During convalescence, Goethe was nursed by his mother and sister. In April 1770, Goethe left Frankfurt in order to finish his studies in Strasbourg.

In Alsace, Goethe blossomed. No other landscape has he described as affectionately as the warm, wide Rhine area. In Strasbourg, Goethe met Johann Gottfried Herder. The two became close friends, and crucially to Goethe's intellectual development, Herder kindled his interest in Shakespeare, Ossian and in the notion of Volkspoesie (folk poetry). On 14 October 1772 Goethe held a gathering in his parental home in honour of the first German "Shakespeare Day". His first acquaintance with Shakespeare's works is described as his personal awakening in literature.[9]

On a trip to the village Sessenheim, Goethe fell in love with Friederike Brion, in October 1770,[10][11] but, after ten months, terminated the relationship in August 1771.[12] Several of his poems, like Willkommen und Abschied, Sesenheimer Lieder and Heidenröslein, originate from this time.

At the end of August 1771, Goethe acquired the academic degree of the Lizenziat (Licentia docendi) in Frankfurt and established a small legal practice. Although in his academic work he had expressed the ambition to make jurisprudence progressively more humane, his inexperience led him to proceed too vigorously in his first cases, and he was reprimanded and lost further ones. This prematurely terminated his career as a lawyer after only a few months. At this time, Goethe was acquainted with the court of Darmstadt, where his inventiveness was praised. From this milieu came Johann Georg Schlosser (who was later to become his brother-in-law) and Johann Heinrich Merck. Goethe also pursued literary plans again; this time, his father did not have anything against it, and even helped. Goethe obtained a copy of the biography of a noble highwayman from the German Peasants' War. In a couple of weeks the biography was reworked into a colourful drama. Entitled Götz von Berlichingen, the work went directly to the heart of Goethe's contemporaries.

Goethe could not subsist on being one of the editors of a literary periodical (published by Schlosser and Merck). In May 1772 he once more began the practice of law at Wetzlar. In 1774 he wrote the book which would bring him worldwide fame, The Sorrows of Young Werther. The outer shape of the work's plot is widely taken over from what Goethe experienced during his Wetzlar time with Charlotte Buff (1753–1828)[13] and her fiancé, Johann Christian Kestner (1741–1800),[13] as well as from the suicide of the author's friend Karl Wilhelm Jerusalem (1747–1772); in it, Goethe made a desperate passion of what was in reality a hearty and relaxed friendship.[14] Despite the immense success of Werther, it did not bring Goethe much financial gain because copyright laws at the time were essentially nonexistent. (In later years Goethe would bypass this problem by periodically authorizing "new, revised" editions of his Complete Works.)[15]
Early years in Weimar
Johann Wolfgang Goethe ca. 1775

In 1775, Goethe was invited, on the strength of his fame as the author of The Sorrows of Young Werther, to the court of Carl August, Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, who would become Grand Duke in 1815. (The Duke at the time was 18 years of age, to Goethe's 26.) Goethe thus went to live in Weimar, where he remained for the rest of his life and where, over the course of many years, he held a succession of offices, becoming the Duke's chief adviser.

In 1776, Goethe formed a close relationship to Charlotte von Stein, an older, married woman. The intimate bond with Frau von Stein lasted for ten years, after which Goethe abruptly left for Italy without giving his companion any notice. She was emotionally distraught at the time, but they were eventually reconciled.[16]

Goethe, aside from official duties, was also a friend and confidant to the Duke, and participated fully in the activities of the court. For Goethe, his first ten years at Weimar could well be described as a garnering of a degree and range of experience which perhaps could be achieved in no other way. Goethe was ennobled in 1782 (this being indicated by the "von" in his name).
Italy
Goethe, age 38, painted by Angelica Kauffman 1787

Goethe's journey to the Italian peninsula and Sicily from 1786 to 1788 was of great significance in his aesthetic and philosophical development. His father had made a similar journey during his own youth, and his example was a major motivating factor for Goethe to make the trip. More importantly, however, the work of Johann Joachim Winckelmann had provoked a general renewed interest in the classical art of ancient Greece and Rome. Thus Goethe's journey had something of the nature of a pilgrimage to it. During the course of his trip Goethe met and befriended the artists Angelica Kauffman and Johann Heinrich Wilhelm Tischbein, as well as encountering such notable characters as Lady Hamilton and Alessandro Cagliostro (see Affair of the Diamond Necklace).

He also journeyed to Sicily during this time, and wrote intriguingly that "To have seen Italy without having seen Sicily is to not have seen Italy at all, for Sicily is the clue to everything." While in Southern Italy and Sicily, Goethe encountered, for the first time genuine Greek (as opposed to Roman) architecture, and was quite startled by its relative simplicity. Winckelmann had not recognized the distinctness of the two styles.

Goethe's diaries of this period form the basis of the non-fiction Italian Journey. Italian Journey only covers the first year of Goethe's visit. The remaining year is largely undocumented, aside from the fact that he spent much of it in Venice. This "gap in the record" has been the source of much speculation over the years.

In the decades which immediately followed its publication in 1816 Italian Journey inspired countless German youths to follow Goethe's example. This is pictured, somewhat satirically, in George Eliot's Middlemarch.
Weimar
A Goethe watercolor depicting a liberty pole at the border to the short-lived Republic of Mainz, created under influence of the French Revolution and destroyed in the Siege of Mainz in which Goethe participated

In late 1792, Goethe took part in the battle of Valmy against revolutionary France, assisting Duke Carl August of Saxe-Weimar during the failed invasion of France. Again during the Siege of Mainz he assisted Carl August as a military observer. His written account of these events can be found within his Complete Works.

In 1794 Friedrich Schiller wrote to Goethe offering friendship; they had previously had only a mutually wary relationship ever since first becoming acquainted in 1788. This collaborative friendship lasted until Schiller's death in 1805.

In 1806, Goethe was living in Weimar with his mistress Christiane Vulpius, the sister of Christian A Vulpius, and their son Julius August Walter von Goethe. On 13 October, Napoleon's army invaded the town. The French "spoon guards," the least-disciplined soldiers, occupied Goethe's house.

    Goethe. Painting by Luise Seidler (Weimar 1811)
    The 'spoon guards' had broken in, they had drunk wine, made a great uproar and called for the master of the house. Goethe's secretary Riemer reports: 'Although already undressed and wearing only his wide nightgown... he descended the stairs towards them and inquired what they wanted from him.... His dignified figure, commanding respect, and his spiritual mien seemed to impress even them.' But it was not to last long. Late at night they burst into his bedroom with drawn bayonets. Goethe was petrified, Christiane raised a lot of noise and even tangled with them, other people who had taken refuge in Goethe’s house rushed in, and so the marauders eventually withdrew again. It was Christiane who commanded and organized the defense of the house on the Frauenplan. The barricading of the kitchen and the cellar against the wild pillaging soldiery was her work. Goethe noted in his diary: "Fires, rapine, a frightful night... Preservation of the house through steadfastness and luck." The luck was Goethe’s, the steadfastness was displayed by Christiane.
    — Schopenhauer and the Wild Years of Philosophy, Ch. 5.[17]

Days afterward, on 19 October 1806, Goethe legitimized their 18-year relationship by marrying Christiane in a quiet marriage service at the Jakobskirche in Weimar. They had already had several children together by this time, including their son, Julius August Walter von Goethe (25 December 1789 – 28 October 1830), whose wife, Ottilie von Pogwisch (31 October 1796 – 26 October 1872), cared for the elder Goethe until his death in 1832. The younger couple had three children: Walther, Freiherr von Goethe (9 April 1818 – 15 April 1885), Wolfgang, Freiherr von Goethe (18 September 1820 – 20 January 1883) and Alma von Goethe (29 October 1827 – 29 September 1844). Christiane von Goethe died in 1816.
Later life

After 1793, Goethe devoted his endeavours primarily to literature. By 1820, Goethe was on amiable terms with Kaspar Maria von Sternberg. In 1823, having recovered from a near fatal heart illness, Goethe fell in love with Ulrike von Levetzow whom he wanted to marry, but because of the opposition of her mother he never proposed. Their last meeting in Carlsbad on 5 September 1823 inspired him to the famous Marienbad Elegy which he considered one of his finest works.[18] During that time he also developed a deep emotional bond with the Polish pianist Maria Agata Szymanowska.[citation needed]
Death

In 1832, Goethe died in Weimar of apparent heart failure. His last words, according to his doctor Carl Vogel, were, "Mehr Licht!" ("More light!'), but this is disputed as Vogel was not in the room at the moment Goethe died.[19] He is buried in the Ducal Vault at Weimar's Historical Cemetery.

Eckermann closes his famous work, Conversations with Goethe, with this passage:
Ulrike von Levetzow. This 18-year-old girl inspired Goethe to the famous Marienbad Elegy

    The morning after Goethe's death, a deep desire seized me to look once again upon his earthly garment. His faithful servant, Frederick, opened for me the chamber in which he was laid out. Stretched upon his back, he reposed as if asleep; profound peace and security reigned in the features of his sublimely noble countenance. The mighty brow seemed yet to harbour thoughts. I wished for a lock of his hair; but reverence prevented me from cutting it off. The body lay naked, only wrapped in a white sheet; large pieces of ice had been placed near it, to keep it fresh as long as possible. Frederick drew aside the sheet, and I was astonished at the divine magnificence of the limbs. The breast was powerful, broad, and arched; the arms and thighs were elegant, and of the most perfect shape; nowhere, on the whole body, was there a trace of either fat or of leanness and decay. A perfect man lay in great beauty before me; and the rapture the sight caused me made me forget for a moment that the immortal spirit had left such an abode. I laid my hand on his heart – there was a deep silence – and I turned away to give free vent to my suppressed tears.
    — (p. 426, Da Capo Press edition, John Oxenford translation)

The first production of Richard Wagner's opera Lohengrin took place in Weimar in 1850. The conductor was Franz Liszt, who chose the date 28 August in honour of Goethe, who was born on 28 August 1749.[20]
Literary work
First edition of The Sorrows of Young Werther

The most important of Goethe's works produced before he went to Weimar were Götz von Berlichingen (1773), a tragedy that was the first work to bring him recognition, and the novel The Sorrows of Young Werther (called Die Leiden des jungen Werthers in German) (1774), which gained him enormous fame as a writer in the Sturm und Drang period which marked the early phase of Romanticism – indeed the book is often considered to be the "spark" which ignited the movement, and can arguably be called the world's first "best-seller". (For the entirety of his life this was the work with which the vast majority of Goethe's contemporaries associated him). During the years at Weimar before he met Schiller he began Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship, wrote the dramas Iphigenie auf Tauris (Iphigenia in Tauris), Egmont, Torquato Tasso, and the fable Reineke Fuchs.

To the period of his friendship with Schiller belong the conception of Wilhelm Meister's Journeyman Years (the continuation of Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship), the idyll of Hermann and Dorothea, the Roman Elegies and the verse drama The Natural Daughter. In the last period, between Schiller's death, in 1805, and his own, appeared Faust Part One, Elective Affinities, the West-Eastern Divan (a collection of poems in the Persian style, influenced by the work of Hafez), his autobiographical Aus meinem Leben: Dichtung und Wahrheit (From My Life: Poetry and Truth) which covers his early life and ends with his departure for Weimar, his Italian Journey, and a series of treatises on art. His writings were immediately influential in literary and artistic circles.

Goethe was fascinated by Kalidasa's Abhijñānaśākuntalam, which was one of the first works of Sanskrit literature that became known in Europe, after being translated from English to German.[21]

Faust Part Two was only finished in the year of his death, and was published posthumously. Also published after his death was the so-called Urfaust, the first sketches, made probably in 1773–74. [22]
Photograph of a large bronze statue of two men standing side-by-side and facing forward. The statue is on a stone pedestal, which has a plaque that reads "Dem Dichterpaar/Goethe und Schiller/das Vaterland".
Goethe-Schiller Monument (1857), Weimar.

The short epistolary novel, Die Leiden des jungen Werthers, or The Sorrows of Young Werther, published in 1774, recounts an unhappy romantic infatuation that ends in suicide. Goethe admitted that he "shot his hero to save himself": a reference to Goethe's own near-suicidal obsession with a young woman during this period, an obsession he quelled through the writing process. The novel remains in print in dozens of languages and its influence is undeniable; its central hero, an obsessive figure driven to despair and destruction by his unrequited love for the young Lotte, has become a pervasive literary archetype. The fact that Werther ends with the protagonist's suicide and funeral—a funeral which "no clergyman attended"—made the book deeply controversial upon its (anonymous) publication, for on the face of it, it appeared to condone and glorify suicide. Suicide is considered sinful by Christian doctrine: suicides were denied Christian burial with the bodies often mistreated and dishonoured in various ways; in corollary, the deceased's property and possessions were often confiscated by the Church.[23] However, Goethe explained his use of Werther in his autobiography. He said he "turned reality into poetry but his friends thought poetry should be turned into reality and the poem imitated." He was against this reading of poetry.[24] Epistolary novels were common during this time, letter-writing being a primary mode of communication. What set Goethe's book apart from other such novels was its expression of unbridled longing for a joy beyond possibility, its sense of defiant rebellion against authority, and of principal importance, its total subjectivity: qualities that trailblazed the Romantic movement.

The next work, his epic closet drama Faust, was to be completed in stages, and only published in its entirety after his death. The first part was published in 1808 and created a sensation. The first operatic version, by Spohr, appeared in 1814, and was subsequently the inspiration for operas and oratorios by Schumann, Berlioz, Gounod, Boito, Busoni, and Schnittke as well as symphonic works by Liszt, Wagner, and Mahler. Faust became the ur-myth of many figures in the 19th century. Later, a facet of its plot, i.e., of selling one's soul to the devil for power over the physical world, took on increasing literary importance and became a view of the victory of technology and of industrialism, along with its dubious human expenses. In 1919, the Goetheanum staged the world premiere of a complete production of Faust. On occasion, the play is still staged in Germany and other parts around the world.
Goethe in the Roman Campagna (1786) by Johann Heinrich Wilhelm Tischbein. Oil on canvas, 164 x 206 cm.[25]

Goethe's poetic work served as a model for an entire movement in German poetry termed Innerlichkeit ("introversion") and represented by, for example, Heine. Goethe's words inspired a number of compositions by, among others, Mozart, Beethoven (who idolised Goethe),[26] Schubert, Berlioz and Wolf. Perhaps the single most influential piece is "Mignon's Song" which opens with one of the most famous lines in German poetry, an allusion to Italy: "Kennst du das Land, wo die Zitronen blühn?" ("Do you know the land where the lemon trees bloom?").

He is also widely quoted. Epigrams such as "Against criticism a man can neither protest nor defend himself; he must act in spite of it, and then it will gradually yield to him", "Divide and rule, a sound motto; unite and lead, a better one", and "Enjoy when you can, and endure when you must", are still in usage or are often paraphrased. Lines from Faust, such as "Das also war des Pudels Kern", "Das ist der Weisheit letzter Schluss", or "Grau ist alle Theorie" have entered everyday German usage.

It may be taken as another measure of Goethe's fame that other well-known quotations are often incorrectly attributed to him, such as Hippocrates' "Art is long, life is short", which is found in Goethe's Faust ("Art is something so long to be learned, and life is so short!") and Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship.
Scientific work
See also: Goethean science

    As to what I have done as a poet,... I take no pride in it... But that in my century I am the only person who knows the truth in the difficult science of colours – of that, I say, I am not a little proud, and here I have a consciousness of a superiority to many.
    — Johann Eckermann, Conversations with Goethe

Although his literary work has attracted the greatest amount of interest, Goethe was also keenly involved in studies of natural science.[27] He wrote several works on morphology, and colour theory. Goethe also had the largest private collection of minerals in all of Europe. By the time of his death, in order to gain a comprehensive view in geology, he had collected 17,800 rock samples.

His focus on morphology and what was later called homology influenced 19th century naturalists, although his ideas of transformation were about the continuous metamorphosis of living things and did not relate to contemporary ideas of "transformisme" or transmutation of species. Homology, or as Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire called it "analogie", was used by Charles Darwin as strong evidence of common descent and of laws of variation.[28] Goethe's studies (notably with an elephant's skull lent to him by Samuel Thomas von Soemmerring) led him to independently discover the human intermaxillary bone in 1784, which Broussonet (1779) and Vicq d'Azyr (1780) had (using different methods) identified several years earlier.[29] While not the only one in his time to question the prevailing view that this bone did not exist in humans, Goethe, who believed ancient anatomists had known about this bone, was the first to prove its peculiarity to all mammals. The elephant's skull that led Goethe to this discovery, and was subsequently named the Goethe Elephant, still exists and is displayed in the Ottoneum in Kassel, Germany.
Light spectrum, from Theory of Colours. Goethe observed that with a prism, colour arises at light-dark edges, and the spectrum occurs where these coloured edges overlap.

During his Italian journey, Goethe formulated a theory of plant metamorphosis in which the archetypal form of the plant is to be found in the leaf – he writes, "from top to bottom a plant is all leaf, united so inseparably with the future bud that one cannot be imagined without the other".[30] In 1790, he published his Metamorphosis of Plants.[31] As one of the many precursors in the history of evolutionary thought, Goethe wrote in Story of My Botanical Studies (1831):

    "The ever-changing display of plant forms, which I have followed for so many years, awakens increasingly within me the notion: The plant forms which surround us were not all created at some given point in time and then locked into the given form, they have been given... a felicitous mobility and plasticity that allows them to grow and adapt themselves to many different conditions in many different places."[32]

Goethe's botanical theories were partly based on his gardening in Weimar.[33]

Goethe also popularized the Goethe barometer using a principle established by Torricelli. According to Hegel, "Goethe has occupied himself a good deal with meteorology; barometer readings interested him particularly... What he says is important: the main thing is that he gives a comparative table of barometric readings during the whole month of December 1822, at Weimar, Jena, London, Boston, Vienna, Töpel... He claims to deduce from it that the barometric level varies in the same propoportion not only in each zone but that it has the same variation, too, at different altitudes above sea-level".[34]

In 1810, Goethe published his Theory of Colours, which he considered his most important work. In it, he contentiously characterized color as arising from the dynamic interplay of light and darkness through the mediation of a turbid medium.[35] In 1816, Schopenhauer went on to develop his own theory in On Vision and Colors based on the observations supplied in Goethe's book. After being translated into English by Charles Eastlake in 1840, his theory became widely adopted by the art world, most notably J. M. W. Turner.[36] Goethe's work also inspired the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, to write his Remarks on Colour. Goethe was vehemently opposed to Newton's analytic treatment of color, engaging instead in compiling a comprehensive rational description of a wide variety of color phenomena. Although the accuracy of Goethe's observations does not admit a great deal of criticism, his theory's failure to demonstrate significant predictive validity eventually rendered it scientifically irrelevant[citation needed]. Goethe was, however, the first to systematically study the physiological effects of color, and his observations on the effect of opposed colors led him to a symmetric arrangement of his color wheel, 'for the colors diametrically opposed to each other... are those which reciprocally evoke each other in the eye. (Goethe, Theory of Colours, 1810).[37] In this, he anticipated Ewald Hering's opponent color theory (1872).[38]

Goethe outlines his method in the essay The experiment as mediator between subject and object (1772).[39] In the Kurschner edition of Goethe's works, the science editor, Rudolf Steiner, presents Goethe's approach to science as phenomenological. Steiner elaborated on that in the books The Theory of Knowledge Implicit in Goethe's World-Conception[40] and Goethe's World View,[41] in which he characterizes intuition as the instrument by which one grasps Goethe's biological archetype—The Typus.

Novalis, himself a geologist and mining engineer, expressed the opinion that Goethe was the first physicist of his time and 'epoch-making in the history of physics', writing that Goethe's studies of light, of the metamorphosis of plants and of insects were indications and proofs 'that the perfect educational lecture belongs in the artist's sphere of work'; and that Goethe would be surpassed 'but only in the way in which the ancients can be surpassed, in inner content and force, in variety and depth – as an artist actually not, or only very little, for his rightness and intensity are perhaps already more exemplary than it would seem'. [42]
Eroticism
Goethe Monument in Chicago's Lincoln Park (1913)

Many of Goethe's works, especially Faust, the Roman Elegies, and the Venetian Epigrams, depict erotic passions and acts. For instance, in Faust, the first use of Faust's power after literally signing a contract with the devil is to fall in love with and impregnate a teenage girl. Some of the Venetian Epigrams were held back from publication due to their sexual content. Goethe clearly saw human sexuality as a topic worthy of poetic and artistic depiction, an idea that was uncommon in a time when the private nature of sexuality was rigorously normative.[43]
Religion and politics

Goethe was a free-thinking Christian who believed that one could be inwardly Christian without following any of the Christian churches, many of whose central teachings he firmly opposed, sharply distinguishing between Christ and the tenets of Christian theology, and criticizing its history as a "hodgepodge of fallacy and violence".[44][45][46] His own descriptions of his relationship to the Christian faith and even to the Church varied widely and have been interpreted even more widely, so that while Goethe's secretary Eckermann portrayed him as enthusiastic about Christianity, Jesus, Martin Luther, and the Protestant Reformation, even calling Christianity the "ultimate religion,"[47][48][49] on one occasion Goethe described himself as "not anti-Christian, nor un-Christian, but most decidedly non-Christian,"[50] and in his Venetian Epigram 66, Goethe listed the symbol of the cross among the four things that he most disliked.[51][52] According to Nietzsche, Goethe had "a kind of almost joyous and trusting fatalism" that has "faith that only in the totality everything redeems itself and appears good and justified."[53]

Born into a Lutheran family, Goethe's early faith was shaken by news of such events as the 1755 Lisbon earthquake and the Seven Years' War. His later spiritual perspective incorporated elements of pantheism (heavily influenced by Spinoza), humanism, and various elements of Western esotericism, as seen most vividly in Part II of Faust. A year before his death, in a letter to Sulpiz Boisserée, Goethe wrote that he had the feeling that all his life he had been aspiring to qualify as one of the Hypsistarians, an ancient Jewish-pagan sect of the Black Sea region who, in his understanding, sought to reverence, as being close to the Godhead, what came to their knowledge of the best and most perfect.[54]

In politics, Goethe was conservative. At the time of the French Revolution, he thought the enthusiasm of the students and professors to be a perversion of their energy and remained skeptical of the ability of the masses to govern.[55] Likewise, he did not oppose the War of Liberation (1813–15) waged by the German states against Napoleon, and remained aloof from the patriotic efforts to unite the various parts of Germany into one nation.

Although often requested to write poems arousing nationalist passions, Goethe would always decline. In old age, he explained why this was so to Eckermann:

    How could I write songs of hatred when I felt no hate? And, between ourselves, I never hated the French, although I thanked God when we were rid of them. How could I, to whom the only significant things are civilization [Kultur] and barbarism, hate a nation which is among the most cultivated in the world, and to which I owe a great part of my own culture? In any case this business of hatred between nations is a curious thing. You will always find it more powerful and barbarous on the lowest levels of civilization. But there exists a level at which it wholly disappears, and where one stands, so to speak, above the nations, and feels the weal or woe of a neighboring people as though it were one's own.[56]

Influence

Goethe had a great effect on the nineteenth century. In many respects, he was the originator of many ideas which later became widespread. He produced volumes of poetry, essays, criticism, a theory of colours and early work on evolution and linguistics. He was fascinated by mineralogy, and the mineral goethite (iron oxide) is named after him.[57] His non-fiction writings, most of which are philosophic and aphoristic in nature, spurred the development of many philosophers, including Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Schopenhauer, Søren Kierkegaard, Friedrich Nietzsche, Ernst Cassirer, Carl Jung, and Ludwig Wittgenstein. Along with Schiller, he was one of the leading figures of Weimar Classicism. Schopenhauer cited Goethe's novel Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship as one of the four greatest novels ever written, along with Tristram Shandy, La Nouvelle Héloïse and Don Quixote.[3]

Goethe embodied many of the contending strands in art over the next century: his work could be lushly emotional, and rigorously formal, brief and epigrammatic, and epic. He would argue that classicism was the means of controlling art, and that romanticism was a sickness, even as he penned poetry rich in memorable images, and rewrote the formal rules of German poetry. Even in contemporary culture, he stands in the background as the author of the ballad that formed the basis for Walt Disney Pictures' The Sorcerer's Apprentice, produced by Jerry Bruckheimer and directed by Jon Turteltaub. The film was based on the relevant section of Disney's animated film Fantasia (1940), which was set to a short scherzo for orchestra by Paul Dukas, L'apprenti sorcier (The Sorcerer's Apprentice, published in 1897, and by far, the best known of Dukas' compositions). All of which were inspired by Goethe's poem, The Sorcerer's Apprentice.[58]

His poetry was set to music by almost every major Austrian and German composer from Mozart to Mahler, and his influence would spread to French drama and opera as well. Beethoven declared that a "Faust" Symphony would be the greatest thing for art. Liszt and Mahler both created symphonies in whole or in large part inspired by this seminal work, which would give the 19th century one of its most paradigmatic figures: Doctor Faustus.
Second Goetheanum

The Faust tragedy/drama, often called Das Drama der Deutschen (the drama of the Germans), written in two parts published decades apart, would stand as his most characteristic and famous artistic creation. Followers of the twentieth century esotericist Rudolf Steiner built a theatre named the Goetheanum after him—where festival performances of Faust are still performed.

Goethe was also a cultural force, who argued that the organic nature of the land moulded the people and their customs—an argument that has recurred ever since. He argued that laws could not be created by pure rationalism, since geography and history shaped habits and patterns. This stood in sharp contrast to the prevailing Enlightenment view that reason was sufficient to create well-ordered societies and good laws.
Goethe memorial in front of the Alte Handelsbörse, Leipzig

It was to a considerable degree due to Goethe's reputation that the city of Weimar was chosen in 1919 as the venue for the national assembly, convened to draft a new constitution for what would become known as Germany's Weimar Republic.

The Federal Republic of Germany's cultural institution, The Goethe-Institut is named after him, and promotes the study of German abroad and fosters knowledge about Germany by providing information on its culture, society and politics.

The literary estate of Goethe in the Goethe and Schiller Archives was inscribed on UNESCO's Memory of the World Register in 2001 in recognition of its historical significance.[59]

Goethe's influence was dramatic because he understood that there was a transition in European sensibilities, an increasing focus on sense, the indescribable, and the emotional. This is not to say that he was emotionalistic or excessive; on the contrary, he lauded personal restraint and felt that excess was a disease: "There is nothing worse than imagination without taste". He argued in his scientific works that a "formative impulse", which he said is operative in every organism, causes an organism to form itself according to its own distinct laws, and therefore rational laws or fiats could not be imposed at all from a higher, transcendent sphere; this placed him in direct opposition to those who attempted to form "enlightened" monarchies based on "rational" laws by, for example, Joseph II of Austria or the subsequent Emperor of the French, Napoleon I. A quotation from Goethe's Scientific Studies will suffice:

    We conceive of the individual animal as a small world, existing for its own sake, by its own means. Every creature is its own reason to be. All its parts have a direct effect on one another, a relationship to one another, thereby constantly renewing the circle of life; thus we are justified in considering every animal physiologically perfect. Viewed from within, no part of the animal is a useless or arbitrary product of the formative impulse (as so often thought). Externally, some parts may seem useless because the inner coherence of the animal nature has given them this form without regard to outer circumstance. Thus...[not] the question, What are they for? but rather, Where do they come from?
    — Suhrkamp ed., vol 12, p. 121; trans. Douglas Miller, Scientific Studies

Schiller, Alexander & Wilhelm von Humboldt, and Goethe in Jena, c. 1797

That change later became the basis for 19th-century thought: organic rather than geometrical, evolving rather than created, and based on sensibility and intuition rather than on imposed order, culminating in, as Goethe said, a "living quality", wherein the subject and object are dissolved together in a poise of inquiry. Consequently, Goethe embraced neither teleological nor deterministic views of growth within every organism. Instead, his view was that the world as a whole grows through continual, external, and internal strife. Moreover, Goethe did not embrace the mechanistic views that contemporaneous science subsumed during his time, and therewith he denied rationality's superiority as the sole interpreter of reality.

His views make him, along with Adam Smith, Thomas Jefferson, and Ludwig van Beethoven, a figure in two worlds: on the one hand, devoted to the sense of taste, order, and finely crafted detail, which is the hallmark of the artistic sense of the Age of Reason and the neo-classical period of architecture; on the other, seeking a personal, intuitive, and personalized form of expression and society, firmly supporting the idea of self-regulating and organic systems.

Thinkers such as Ralph Waldo Emerson would take up many similar ideas in the 1800s. Goethe's ideas on evolution would frame the question that Darwin and Wallace would approach within the scientific paradigm. The Serbian inventor and electrical engineer Nikola Tesla was heavily influenced by Goethe's Faust, his favorite poem, and had actually memorized the entire text. It was while reciting a certain verse that he was struck with the epiphany that would lead to the idea of the rotating magnetic field and ultimately, alternating current.[60]
Bibliography
Main article: Johann Wolfgang von Goethe bibliography

    The Life of Goethe by George Henry Lewes
    Goethe: The History of a Man by Emil Ludwig
    Goethe by Georg Brandes. Authorized translation from the Danish (2nd ed. 1916) by Allen W. Porterfield, New York, Crown publishers, 1936. "Crown edition, 1936." Title Wolfgang Goethe
    Goethe: his life and times by Richard Friedenthal
    Lotte in Weimar: The Beloved Returns by Thomas Mann
    Conversations with Goethe by Johann Peter Eckermann
    Goethe's World: as seen in letters and memoirs ed. by Berthold Biermann
    Goethe: Four Studies by Albert Schweitzer
    Goethe Poet and Thinker by E. M. Wilkinson and L. A. Willoughby
    Goethe and his Publishers by Siegfried Unseld
    Goethe by T. J. Reed
    Goethe. A Psychoanalytic Study, by Kurt R. Eissler
    The Life of Goethe. A Critical Biography by John Williams
    Goethe: The Poet and the Age (2 Vols.), by Nicholas Boyle
    Goethe's Concept of the Daemonic: After the Ancients, by Angus Nicholls
    Goethe and Rousseau: Resonances of their Mind, by Carl Hammer, Jr.
    Doctor Faustus of the popular legend, Marlowe, the Puppet-Play, Goethe, and Lenau, treated historically and critically.-A parallel between Goethe and Schiller.-An historic outline of German Literature , by Louis Pagel
    Goethe and Schiller, Essays on German Literature, by Hjalmar Hjorth Boyesen
    Tales for Transformation, trans. Scott Thompson
    Goethe-Wörterbuch (Goethe Dictionary, abbreviated GWb). Herausgegeben von der Berlin-Brandenburgischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen und der Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften. Stuttgart. Verlag W. Kohlhammer; ISBN 978-3-17-019121-1

See also
Portal icon 	Poetry portal
Portal icon 	Philosophy portal

    Young Goethe in Love (2010)
    Dora Stock – her encounters with the 16-year-old Goethe.
    Goethe Basin
    Johann-Wolfgang-von-Goethe-Gymnasium
    W. H. Murray – author of misattributed quotation "Until one is committed ..."
    Nature (Tobler essay), essay often mis-attributed to Goethe

References

"Goethe". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
"Classical Weimar UNESCO Justification". Justification for UNESCO Heritage Cites. UNESCO. Retrieved 7 June 2012.
Schopenhauer, Arthur. "The Art of Literature". The Essays of Arthur Schopenahuer. Retrieved 22 March 2015.
Herman Grimm: Goethe. Vorlesungen gehalten an der Königlichen Universität zu Berlin. Vol. 1. J.G. Cotta'sche Buchhandlung Nachfolger, Stuttgart / Berlin 1923, p. 36
von Goethe, Johann Wolfgang. The Autobiography of Goethe: truth and poetry, from my own life, Volume 1 (1897), translated by John Oxenford, pp. 114, 129
Valerian Tornius: Goethe – Leben, Wirken und Schaffen. Ludwig-Röhrscheid-Verlag, Bonn 1949, p. 26
Emil Ludwig: Goethe – Geschichte eines Menschen. Vol. 1. Ernst-Rowohlt-Verlag, Berlin 1926, p. 17–18
Karl Goedeke: Goethes Leben. Cotta / Kröner, Stuttgart around 1883, p. 16–17
"Originally speech of Goethe to the ''Shakespeare's Day'' by University Duisburg". Uni-duisburg-essen.de. Retrieved 17 July 2014.
Herman Grimm: Goethe. Vorlesungen gehalten an der Königlichen Universität zu Berlin. Vol. 1. J. G. Cotta'sche Buchhandlung Nachfolger, Stuttgart / Berlin 1923, p. 81
Karl Robert Mandelkow, Bodo Morawe: Goethes Briefe. 2. edition. Vol. 1: Briefe der Jahre 1764–1786. Christian Wegner, Hamburg 1968, p. 571
Valerian Tornius: Goethe — Leben, Wirken und Schaffen. Ludwig-Röhrscheid-Verlag, Bonn 1949, p.60
Mandelkow, Karl Robert (1962). Goethes Briefe. Vol. 1: Briefe der Jahre 1764–1786. Christian Wegner Verlag. p. 589
Mandelkow, Karl Robert (1962). Goethes Briefe. Vol. 1: Briefe der Jahre 1764–1786. Christian Wegner Verlag. p. 590-592
see Goethe and his Publishers
Charlotte Von Stein. Classic Encyclopedia, retrieved 14 April 2011
Safranski, Rüdiger (1990). Schopenhauer and the Wild Years of Philosophy. Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-79275-0.
"Goethe's third summer".
Carl Vogel: Die letzte Krankheit Goethe’s. In: Journal der practischen Heilkunde (1833).
Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians, 5th ed., 1954
Baumer, Rachel Van M.; Brandon, James R. (1993) [1981]. Sanskrit Drama in Performance. Motilal Banarsidass Publ. p. 9. ISBN 9788120807723.
Goethe's Plays, by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, translated into English with Introductions by Charles E. Passage, Publisher Benn Limited 1980 ISBN 0510000878 / 9780510000875 / 0-510-00087-8
"The Stigma of Suicide – A history". Pips Project. See also: "Ophelia's Burial".
The Autobiography of Goethe Book 13 p. 502ff
"Goethe in the Roman Campagna". Städel. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Wigmore, Richard. "A meeting of genius: Beethoven and Goethe, July 1812". Gramophone. Haymarket. Retrieved 6 July 2012.
"Johann Wolfgang von Goethe". The Nature Institute. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Darwin, C. R. (1859). On the origin of species by means of natural selection, or the preservation of favoured races in the struggle for life (1st ed.). John Murray.
K. Barteczko and M. Jacob (1999). "A re-evaluation of the premaxillary bone in humans". Anatomy and Embryology 207 (6): 417–437. doi:10.1007/s00429-003-0366-x. PMID 14760532.
Goethe, J.W. Italian Journey. Robert R Heitner. Suhrkamp ed., vol 6.
Magnus, Rudolf; Schmid, Gunther (20 September 2004). Metamorphosis of Plants. Google Books. ISBN 978-1-4179-4984-7. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Frank Teichmann (tr. Jon McAlice) "The Emergence of the Idea of Evolution in the Time of Goethe" first published in Interdisciplinary Aspects of Evolution, Urachhaus (1989)
Balzer, Georg (1966). Goethe als Gartenfreund. München: F. Bruckmann KG.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Hegel's Philosophy of Nature: Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences (1830), Part 2 Translated by A. V. Miller illustrated, reissue, reprint Oxford University Press, 2005 ISBN 0-19-927267-0, ISBN 978-0-19-927267-9, Google Books
Aristotle wrote that color is a mixture of light and dark, since white light is always seen as somewhat darkened when it is seen as a color. (Aristotle, On Sense and its Objects, III, 439b, 20 ff.: "White and black may be juxtaposed in such a way that by the minuteness of the division of its parts each is invisible while their product is visible, and thus color may be produced.")
Bockemuhl, M. (1991). Turner. Taschen, Koln. ISBN 3-8228-6325-4.
Goethe, Johann (1810). Theory of Colours, paragraph No. 50.
"Goethe's Color Theory". Retrieved 28 August 2008.
"The Experiment as Mediator between Subject and Object". Archived from the original on 11 November 2011. Retrieved 26 June 2014.
"The Theory of Knowledge Implicit in Goethe's World Conception". Retrieved 28 August 2008.
"Goethe's World View". Retrieved 28 August 2008.
'Goethe's Message of Beauty in Our Twentieth Century World', (Friedrich) Frederick Hiebel, RSCP California. ISBN 0-916786-37-4
Outing Goethe and His Age; edited by Alice A. Kuzniar (page number needed)
The phrase Goethe uses is "Mischmasch von Irrtum und Gewalt", in his "Zahme Xenien" IX, Goethes Gedichte in Zeitlicher Folge, Insel Verlag 1982 ISBN 3458140131, p. 1121
Arnold Bergsträsser, "Goethe's View of Christ", Modern Philology, Vol. 46, No. 3 (Feb. 1949), pp. 172–202; M. Tetz, "Mischmasch von Irrtum und Gewalt. Zu Goethes Vers auf die Kirchengeschichte", Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche 88 (1991) pp. 339–363
Goethe in East Germany 1949–1989: Toward a History of the Goethe reception in the GDR, p.126. Books.google.es. Retrieved 17 July 2014.
Conversations of Goethe with Eckermann and Soret, Vol II, p.423-424. Books.google.es. Retrieved 17 July 2014.
The Crucified God: The Cross of Christ As the Foundation and Criticism of Christian Theology, SCM Press, London, 1973, p.27-28. Books.google.es. Retrieved 17 July 2014.
11 March 1832, Oxenford translation
Boyle 1992, 353
''Venetian Epigrams''. Books.google.com. Retrieved 17 July 2014.
Venetian Epigrams, 66, ["Wenige sind mir jedoch wie Gift und Schlange zuwider; Viere: Rauch des Tabacks, Wanzen und Knoblauch und †."]. The cross symbol he drew has been variously understood as meaning Christianity, Christ, or death.
Nietzsche, The Will to Power, § 95
Lletter to Boisserée dated 22 March 1831 quoted in Peter Boerner, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 1832/1982: A Biographical Essay. Bonn: Inter Nationes, 1981 p. 82
McCabe, Joseph. 'Goethe: The Man and His Character'. pp. 343
Will Durant (1967). The Story of Civilization Volume 10: Rousseau and Revolution. Simon&Schuster. p. 607.
Webmineral.com. Retrieved 21 August 2009,
Kit, Borys (8 January 2009). "Aussie actress swept off her feet by "Apprentice". The Hollywood Reporter. Reuters. Retrieved 16 June 2010.
"The literary estate of Goethe in the Goethe and Schiller Archives". UNESCO Memory of the World Programme. 16 May 2008. Retrieved 15 December 2009.
Seifer, Marc J. (1998) "Wizard: The Life and Times of Nikola Tesla: Biography of a Genius", Citadel Press, pp. 22, 308
William Shakespeare
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Shakespeare)
This article is about the poet and playwright. For other persons of the same name, see William Shakespeare (disambiguation). For other uses of "Shakespeare", see Shakespeare (disambiguation).
William Shakespeare
Shakespeare.jpg
The Chandos portrait, artist and authenticity unconfirmed. Courtesy of National Portrait Gallery, London.
Born 	Baptised 26 April 1564 (birth date unknown)
Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwickshire, West Midlands, England
Died 	23 April 1616 (aged 52)
Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwickshire, England
Occupation 	Playwright, poet, actor
Period 	English Renaissance, Elizabethan Era
Spouse 	Anne Hathaway (m. 1582–1616)
Children 	

    Susanna Hall
    Hamnet Shakespeare
    Judith Quiney

Signature 	

William Shakespeare (/ˈʃeɪkspɪər/;[1] 26 April 1564 (baptised) – 23 April 1616)[nb 1] was an English poet, playwright, and actor, widely regarded as the greatest writer in the English language and the world's pre-eminent dramatist.[2] He is often called England's national poet, and the "Bard of Avon".[3][nb 2] His extant works, including collaborations, consist of approximately 38 plays,[nb 3] 154 sonnets, two long narrative poems, and a few other verses, some of uncertain authorship. His plays have been translated into every major living language and are performed more often than those of any other playwright.[4]

Shakespeare was born and brought up in Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwickshire. At the age of 18, he married Anne Hathaway, with whom he had three children: Susanna, and twins Hamnet and Judith. Sometime between 1585 and 1592, he began a successful career in London as an actor, writer, and part-owner of a playing company called the Lord Chamberlain's Men, later known as the King's Men. He appears to have retired to Stratford around 1613, at age 49, where he died three years later. Few records of Shakespeare's private life survive, which has stimulated considerable speculation about such matters as his physical appearance, sexuality, and religious beliefs, and whether the works attributed to him were written by others.[5]

Shakespeare produced most of his known work between 1589 and 1613.[6][nb 4] His early plays were primarily comedies and histories, and these are regarded as some of the best work ever produced in these genres. He then wrote mainly tragedies until about 1608, including Hamlet, Othello, King Lear, and Macbeth, considered some of the finest works in the English language.[2] In his last phase, he wrote tragicomedies, also known as romances, and collaborated with other playwrights.

Many of his plays were published in editions of varying quality and accuracy during his lifetime. In 1623, however, John Heminges and Henry Condell, two friends and fellow actors of Shakespeare, published a more definitive text known as the First Folio, a posthumous collected edition of his dramatic works that included all but two of the plays now recognised as Shakespeare's.[7] It was prefaced with a poem by Ben Jonson, in which Shakespeare is hailed, presciently, as "not of an age, but for all time".[7] In the 20th and 21st centuries, his works have been repeatedly adapted and rediscovered by new movements in scholarship and performance. His plays remain highly popular, and are constantly studied, performed, and reinterpreted in diverse cultural and political contexts throughout the world.

In 2016, the 400th anniversary of the playwright's death, celebrations will commence in the United Kingdom and across the world to honour Shakespeare and his work.[8]

Contents

    1 Life
        1.1 Early life
        1.2 London and theatrical career
        1.3 Later years and death
    2 Plays
        2.1 Performances
        2.2 Textual sources
    3 Poems
        3.1 Sonnets
    4 Style
    5 Influence
    6 Critical reputation
    7 Works
        7.1 Classification of the plays
    8 Speculation about Shakespeare
        8.1 Authorship
        8.2 Religion
        8.3 Sexuality
        8.4 Portraiture
    9 See also
    10 Notes
        10.1 Footnotes
        10.2 Citations
    11 References
    12 External links

Life
Main article: Shakespeare's life
Early life

William Shakespeare was the son of John Shakespeare, an alderman and a successful glover originally from Snitterfield, and Mary Arden, the daughter of an affluent landowning farmer.[9] He was born in Stratford-upon-Avon and baptised there on 26 April 1564. His actual date of birth remains unknown, but is traditionally observed on 23 April, Saint George's Day.[10] This date, which can be traced back to an 18th-century scholar's mistake, has proved appealing to biographers, since Shakespeare died 23 April 1616.[11] He was the third child of eight and the eldest surviving son.[12]

Although no attendance records for the period survive, most biographers agree that Shakespeare was probably educated at the King's New School in Stratford,[13] a free school chartered in 1553,[14] about a quarter-mile (400 m) from his home. Grammar schools varied in quality during the Elizabethan era, but grammar school curricula were largely similar: the basic Latin text was standardised by royal decree,[15] and the school would have provided an intensive education in grammar based upon Latin classical authors.[16]
John Shakespeare's house, believed to be Shakespeare's birthplace, in Stratford-upon-Avon.

At the age of 18, Shakespeare married 26-year-old Anne Hathaway. The consistory court of the Diocese of Worcester issued a marriage licence on 27 November 1582. The next day, two of Hathaway's neighbours posted bonds guaranteeing that no lawful claims impeded the marriage.[17] The ceremony may have been arranged in some haste, since the Worcester chancellor allowed the marriage banns to be read once instead of the usual three times,[18] and six months after the marriage Anne gave birth to a daughter, Susanna, baptised 26 May 1583.[19] Twins, son Hamnet and daughter Judith, followed almost two years later and were baptised 2 February 1585.[20] Hamnet died of unknown causes at the age of 11 and was buried 11 August 1596.[21]
Shakespeare's coat of arms, as it appears on the rough draft of the application to grant a coat-of-arms to John Shakespeare. It features a spear as a pun on the family name.[nb 5]

After the birth of the twins, Shakespeare left few historical traces until he is mentioned as part of the London theatre scene in 1592. The exception is the appearance of his name in the 'complaints bill' of a law case before the Queen's Bench court at Westminster dated Michaelmas Term 1588 and 9 October 1589.[22] Scholars refer to the years between 1585 and 1592 as Shakespeare's "lost years".[23] Biographers attempting to account for this period have reported many apocryphal stories. Nicholas Rowe, Shakespeare's first biographer, recounted a Stratford legend that Shakespeare fled the town for London to escape prosecution for deer poaching in the estate of local squire Thomas Lucy. Shakespeare is also supposed to have taken his revenge on Lucy by writing a scurrilous ballad about him.[24] Another 18th-century story has Shakespeare starting his theatrical career minding the horses of theatre patrons in London.[25] John Aubrey reported that Shakespeare had been a country schoolmaster.[26] Some 20th-century scholars have suggested that Shakespeare may have been employed as a schoolmaster by Alexander Hoghton of Lancashire, a Catholic landowner who named a certain "William Shakeshafte" in his will.[27] Little evidence substantiates such stories other than hearsay collected after his death, and Shakeshafte was a common name in the Lancashire area.[28]
London and theatrical career

"All the world's a stage,
and all the men and women merely players:
they have their exits and their entrances;
and one man in his time plays many parts ..."
—As You Like It, Act II, Scene 7, 139–42[29]

It is not known definitively when Shakespeare began writing, but contemporary allusions and records of performances show that several of his plays were on the London stage by 1592.[30] By then, he was sufficiently known in London to be attacked in print by the playwright Robert Greene in his Groats-Worth of Wit:

    ... there is an upstart Crow, beautified with our feathers, that with his Tiger's heart wrapped in a Player's hide, supposes he is as well able to bombast out a blank verse as the best of you: and being an absolute Johannes factotum, is in his own conceit the only Shake-scene in a country.[31]

Scholars differ on the exact meaning of Greene's words,[32] but most agree that Greene is accusing Shakespeare of reaching above his rank in trying to match such university-educated writers as Christopher Marlowe, Thomas Nashe and Greene himself (the so-called "university wits").[33] The italicised phrase parodying the line "Oh, tiger's heart wrapped in a woman's hide" from Shakespeare's Henry VI, Part 3, along with the pun "Shake-scene", clearly identify Shakespeare as Greene's target. As used here, Johannes Factotum ("Jack of all trades") refers to a second-rate tinkerer with the work of others, rather than the more common "universal genius".[32][34]

Greene's attack is the earliest surviving mention of Shakespeare's work in the theatre. Biographers suggest that his career may have begun any time from the mid-1580s, to just before Greene's remarks.[35] After 1594, Shakespeare's plays were performed only by the Lord Chamberlain's Men, a company owned by a group of players, including Shakespeare, that soon became the leading playing company in London.[36] After the death of Queen Elizabeth in 1603, the company was awarded a royal patent by the new King James I, and changed its name to the King's Men.[37]

In 1599, a partnership of members of the company built their own theatre on the south bank of the River Thames, which they named the Globe. In 1608, the partnership also took over the Blackfriars indoor theatre. Extant records of Shakespeare's property purchases and investments indicate that his association with the company made him a wealthy man,[38] and in 1597 he bought the second-largest house in Stratford, New Place, and in 1605, invested in a share of the parish tithes in Stratford.[39]

Some of Shakespeare's plays were published in quarto editions beginning in 1594, and by 1598, his name had become a selling point and began to appear on the title pages.[40] Shakespeare continued to act in his own and other plays after his success as a playwright. The 1616 edition of Ben Jonson's Works names him on the cast lists for Every Man in His Humour (1598) and Sejanus His Fall (1603).[41] The absence of his name from the 1605 cast list for Jonson's Volpone is taken by some scholars as a sign that his acting career was nearing its end.[42] The First Folio of 1623, however, lists Shakespeare as one of "the Principal Actors in all these Plays", some of which were first staged after Volpone, although we cannot know for certain which roles he played.[43] In 1610, John Davies of Hereford wrote that "good Will" played "kingly" roles.[44] In 1709, Rowe passed down a tradition that Shakespeare played the ghost of Hamlet's father.[45] Later traditions maintain that he also played Adam in As You Like It, and the Chorus in Henry V,[46] though scholars doubt the sources of that information.[47]

Throughout his career, Shakespeare divided his time between London and Stratford. In 1596, the year before he bought New Place as his family home in Stratford, Shakespeare was living in the parish of St. Helen's, Bishopsgate, north of the River Thames.[48][49] He moved across the river to Southwark by 1599, the same year his company constructed the Globe Theatre there.[48][50] By 1604, he had moved north of the river again, to an area north of St Paul's Cathedral with many fine houses. There he rented rooms from a French Huguenot named Christopher Mountjoy, a maker of ladies' wigs and other headgear.[51]
Later years and death

Rowe was the first biographer to record the tradition, repeated by Johnson, that Shakespeare retired to Stratford 'some years before his death'.[52][53] He was still working as an actor in London in 1608; in an answer to the sharers' petition in 1635 Cuthbert Burbage stated that after purchasing the lease of the Blackfriars Theatre in 1608 from Henry Evans, the King's Men 'placed men players' there, 'which were Heminges, Condell, Shakespeare, etc.'.[54] However it is perhaps relevant that the bubonic plague raged in London throughout 1609.[55][56] The London public playhouses were repeatedly closed during extended outbreaks of the plague (a total of over 60 months closure between May 1603 and February 1610),[57] which meant there was often no acting work. Retirement from all work was uncommon at that time.[58] Shakespeare continued to visit London during the years 1611–1614.[52] In 1612, he was called as a witness in Bellott v. Mountjoy, a court case concerning the marriage settlement of Mountjoy's daughter, Mary.[59] In March 1613 he bought a gatehouse in the former Blackfriars priory;[60] and from November 1614 he was in London for several weeks with his son-in-law, John Hall.[61] After 1610, Shakespeare wrote fewer plays, and none are attributed to him after 1613.[62] His last three plays were collaborations, probably with John Fletcher,[63] who succeeded him as the house playwright of the King's Men.[64]
Shakespeare's funerary monument in Stratford-upon-Avon.

Shakespeare died on 23 April 1616, at the age of 52.[65] He died within a month of signing his will, a document which he begins by describing himself as being in "perfect health". No extant contemporary source explains how or why he died. Half a century later, John Ward, the vicar of Stratford, wrote in his notebook: "Shakespeare, Drayton and Ben Jonson had a merry meeting and, it seems, drank too hard, for Shakespeare died of a fever there contracted",[66][67] not an impossible scenario, since Shakespeare knew Jonson and Drayton. Of the tributes from fellow authors, one refers to his relatively sudden death: "We wondered, Shakespeare, that thou went'st so soon/From the world's stage to the grave's tiring room."[68]

He was survived by his wife and two daughters. Susanna had married a physician, John Hall, in 1607,[69] and Judith had married Thomas Quiney, a vintner, two months before Shakespeare's death.[70] Shakespeare signed his last will and testament on 25 March 1616; the following day his new son-in-law, Thomas Quiney was found guilty of fathering an illegitimate son by Margaret Wheeler, who had died during childbirth. Thomas was ordered by the church court to do public penance, which would have caused much shame and embarrassment for the Shakespeare family.[71]

Shakespeare bequeathed the bulk of his large estate to his elder daughter Susanna[72] under stipulations that she pass it down intact to "the first son of her body".[73] The Quineys had three children, all of whom died without marrying.[74] The Halls had one child, Elizabeth, who married twice but died without children in 1670, ending Shakespeare's direct line.[75] Shakespeare's will scarcely mentions his wife, Anne, who was probably entitled to one third of his estate automatically.[76] He did make a point, however, of leaving her "my second best bed", a bequest that has led to much speculation.[77] Some scholars see the bequest as an insult to Anne, whereas others believe that the second-best bed would have been the matrimonial bed and therefore rich in significance.[78]

Shakespeare was buried in the chancel of the Holy Trinity Church two days after his death.[79] The epitaph carved into the stone slab covering his grave includes a curse against moving his bones, which was carefully avoided during restoration of the church in 2008:[80]
Shakespeare's grave, next to those of Anne Shakespeare, his wife, and Thomas Nash, the husband of his granddaughter.

Good frend for Iesvs sake forbeare,
To digg the dvst encloased heare.
Bleste be Middle English the.svg man Middle English that.svg spares thes stones,
And cvrst be he Middle English that.svg moves my bones.[81][nb 6]

(Modern spelling: Good friend, for Jesus' sake forbear, / To dig the dust enclosed here. / Blessed be the man that spares these stones, / And cursed be he that moves my bones.)

Sometime before 1623, a funerary monument was erected in his memory on the north wall, with a half-effigy of him in the act of writing. Its plaque compares him to Nestor, Socrates, and Virgil.[82] In 1623, in conjunction with the publication of the First Folio, the Droeshout engraving was published.[83]

Shakespeare has been commemorated in many statues and memorials around the world, including funeral monuments in Southwark Cathedral and Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey.
Plays
Procession of Characters from Shakespeare's Plays by an unknown artist
Main articles: Shakespeare's plays and William Shakespeare's collaborations

Most playwrights of the period typically collaborated with others at some point, and critics agree that Shakespeare did the same, mostly early and late in his career.[84] Some attributions, such as Titus Andronicus and the early history plays, remain controversial, while The Two Noble Kinsmen and the lost Cardenio have well-attested contemporary documentation. Textual evidence also supports the view that several of the plays were revised by other writers after their original composition.

The first recorded works of Shakespeare are Richard III and the three parts of Henry VI, written in the early 1590s during a vogue for historical drama. Shakespeare's plays are difficult to date, however,[85] and studies of the texts suggest that Titus Andronicus, The Comedy of Errors, The Taming of the Shrew and The Two Gentlemen of Verona may also belong to Shakespeare's earliest period.[86] His first histories, which draw heavily on the 1587 edition of Raphael Holinshed's Chronicles of England, Scotland, and Ireland,[87] dramatise the destructive results of weak or corrupt rule and have been interpreted as a justification for the origins of the Tudor dynasty.[88] The early plays were influenced by the works of other Elizabethan dramatists, especially Thomas Kyd and Christopher Marlowe, by the traditions of medieval drama, and by the plays of Seneca.[89] The Comedy of Errors was also based on classical models, but no source for The Taming of the Shrew has been found, though it is related to a separate play of the same name and may have derived from a folk story.[90] Like The Two Gentlemen of Verona, in which two friends appear to approve of rape,[91] the Shrew's story of the taming of a woman's independent spirit by a man sometimes troubles modern critics and directors.[92]
Oberon, Titania and Puck with Fairies Dancing. By William Blake, c. 1786. Tate Britain.

Shakespeare's early classical and Italianate comedies, containing tight double plots and precise comic sequences, give way in the mid-1590s to the romantic atmosphere of his most acclaimed comedies.[93] A Midsummer Night's Dream is a witty mixture of romance, fairy magic, and comic lowlife scenes.[94] Shakespeare's next comedy, the equally romantic Merchant of Venice, contains a portrayal of the vengeful Jewish moneylender Shylock, which reflects Elizabethan views but may appear derogatory to modern audiences.[95] The wit and wordplay of Much Ado About Nothing,[96] the charming rural setting of As You Like It, and the lively merrymaking of Twelfth Night complete Shakespeare's sequence of great comedies.[97] After the lyrical Richard II, written almost entirely in verse, Shakespeare introduced prose comedy into the histories of the late 1590s, Henry IV, parts 1 and 2, and Henry V. His characters become more complex and tender as he switches deftly between comic and serious scenes, prose and poetry, and achieves the narrative variety of his mature work.[98] This period begins and ends with two tragedies: Romeo and Juliet, the famous romantic tragedy of sexually charged adolescence, love, and death;[99] and Julius Caesar—based on Sir Thomas North's 1579 translation of Plutarch's Parallel Lives—which introduced a new kind of drama.[100] According to Shakespearean scholar James Shapiro, in Julius Caesar "the various strands of politics, character, inwardness, contemporary events, even Shakespeare's own reflections on the act of writing, began to infuse each other".[101]
Hamlet, Horatio, Marcellus, and the Ghost of Hamlet's Father. Henry Fuseli, 1780–5. Kunsthaus Zürich.

In the early 17th century, Shakespeare wrote the so-called "problem plays" Measure for Measure, Troilus and Cressida, and All's Well That Ends Well and a number of his best known tragedies.[102] Many critics believe that Shakespeare's greatest tragedies represent the peak of his art. The titular hero of one of Shakespeare's most famous tragedies, Hamlet, has probably been discussed more than any other Shakespearean character, especially for his famous soliloquy which begins "To be or not to be; that is the question".[103] Unlike the introverted Hamlet, whose fatal flaw is hesitation, the heroes of the tragedies that followed, Othello and King Lear, are undone by hasty errors of judgement.[104] The plots of Shakespeare's tragedies often hinge on such fatal errors or flaws, which overturn order and destroy the hero and those he loves.[105] In Othello, the villain Iago stokes Othello's sexual jealousy to the point where he murders the innocent wife who loves him.[106] In King Lear, the old king commits the tragic error of giving up his powers, initiating the events which lead to the torture and blinding of the Earl of Gloucester and the murder of Lear's youngest daughter Cordelia. According to the critic Frank Kermode, "the play-offers neither its good characters nor its audience any relief from its cruelty".[107] In Macbeth, the shortest and most compressed of Shakespeare's tragedies,[108] uncontrollable ambition incites Macbeth and his wife, Lady Macbeth, to murder the rightful king and usurp the throne, until their own guilt destroys them in turn.[109] In this play, Shakespeare adds a supernatural element to the tragic structure. His last major tragedies, Antony and Cleopatra and Coriolanus, contain some of Shakespeare's finest poetry and were considered his most successful tragedies by the poet and critic T. S. Eliot.[110]

In his final period, Shakespeare turned to romance or tragicomedy and completed three more major plays: Cymbeline, The Winter's Tale and The Tempest, as well as the collaboration, Pericles, Prince of Tyre. Less bleak than the tragedies, these four plays are graver in tone than the comedies of the 1590s, but they end with reconciliation and the forgiveness of potentially tragic errors.[111] Some commentators have seen this change in mood as evidence of a more serene view of life on Shakespeare's part, but it may merely reflect the theatrical fashion of the day.[112] Shakespeare collaborated on two further surviving plays, Henry VIII and The Two Noble Kinsmen, probably with John Fletcher.[113]
Performances
Main article: Shakespeare in performance

It is not clear for which companies Shakespeare wrote his early plays. The title page of the 1594 edition of Titus Andronicus reveals that the play had been acted by three different troupes.[114] After the plagues of 1592–3, Shakespeare's plays were performed by his own company at The Theatre and the Curtain in Shoreditch, north of the Thames.[115] Londoners flocked there to see the first part of Henry IV, Leonard Digges recording, "Let but Falstaff come, Hal, Poins, the rest ... and you scarce shall have a room".[116] When the company found themselves in dispute with their landlord, they pulled The Theatre down and used the timbers to construct the Globe Theatre, the first playhouse built by actors for actors, on the south bank of the Thames at Southwark.[117] The Globe opened in autumn 1599, with Julius Caesar one of the first plays staged. Most of Shakespeare's greatest post-1599 plays were written for the Globe, including Hamlet, Othello and King Lear.[118]
The reconstructed Globe Theatre, London.

After the Lord Chamberlain's Men were renamed the King's Men in 1603, they entered a special relationship with the new King James. Although the performance records are patchy, the King's Men performed seven of Shakespeare's plays at court between 1 November 1604 and 31 October 1605, including two performances of The Merchant of Venice.[119] After 1608, they performed at the indoor Blackfriars Theatre during the winter and the Globe during the summer.[120] The indoor setting, combined with the Jacobean fashion for lavishly staged masques, allowed Shakespeare to introduce more elaborate stage devices. In Cymbeline, for example, Jupiter descends "in thunder and lightning, sitting upon an eagle: he throws a thunderbolt. The ghosts fall on their knees."[121]

The actors in Shakespeare's company included the famous Richard Burbage, William Kempe, Henry Condell and John Heminges. Burbage played the leading role in the first performances of many of Shakespeare's plays, including Richard III, Hamlet, Othello, and King Lear.[122] The popular comic actor Will Kempe played the servant Peter in Romeo and Juliet and Dogberry in Much Ado About Nothing, among other characters.[123] He was replaced around 1600 by Robert Armin, who played roles such as Touchstone in As You Like It and the fool in King Lear.[124] In 1613, Sir Henry Wotton recorded that Henry VIII "was set forth with many extraordinary circumstances of pomp and ceremony".[125] On 29 June, however, a cannon set fire to the thatch of the Globe and burned the theatre to the ground, an event which pinpoints the date of a Shakespeare play with rare precision.[125]
Textual sources
Title page of the First Folio, 1623. Copper engraving of Shakespeare by Martin Droeshout.

In 1623, John Heminges and Henry Condell, two of Shakespeare's friends from the King's Men, published the First Folio, a collected edition of Shakespeare's plays. It contained 36 texts, including 18 printed for the first time.[126] Many of the plays had already appeared in quarto versions—flimsy books made from sheets of paper folded twice to make four leaves.[127] No evidence suggests that Shakespeare approved these editions, which the First Folio describes as "stol'n and surreptitious copies".[128] Alfred Pollard termed some of them "bad quartos" because of their adapted, paraphrased or garbled texts, which may in places have been reconstructed from memory.[129] Where several versions of a play survive, each differs from the other. The differences may stem from copying or printing errors, from notes by actors or audience members, or from Shakespeare's own papers.[130] In some cases, for example Hamlet, Troilus and Cressida and Othello, Shakespeare could have revised the texts between the quarto and folio editions. In the case of King Lear, however, while most modern editions do conflate them, the 1623 folio version is so different from the 1608 quarto that the Oxford Shakespeare prints them both, arguing that they cannot be conflated without confusion.[131]
Poems

In 1593 and 1594, when the theatres were closed because of plague, Shakespeare published two narrative poems on erotic themes, Venus and Adonis and The Rape of Lucrece. He dedicated them to Henry Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton. In Venus and Adonis, an innocent Adonis rejects the sexual advances of Venus; while in The Rape of Lucrece, the virtuous wife Lucrece is raped by the lustful Tarquin.[132] Influenced by Ovid's Metamorphoses,[133] the poems show the guilt and moral confusion that result from uncontrolled lust.[134] Both proved popular and were often reprinted during Shakespeare's lifetime. A third narrative poem, A Lover's Complaint, in which a young woman laments her seduction by a persuasive suitor, was printed in the first edition of the Sonnets in 1609. Most scholars now accept that Shakespeare wrote A Lover's Complaint. Critics consider that its fine qualities are marred by leaden effects.[135] The Phoenix and the Turtle, printed in Robert Chester's 1601 Love's Martyr, mourns the deaths of the legendary phoenix and his lover, the faithful turtle dove. In 1599, two early drafts of sonnets 138 and 144 appeared in The Passionate Pilgrim, published under Shakespeare's name but without his permission.[136]
Sonnets
Main article: Shakespeare's sonnets
Title page from 1609 edition of Shake-Speares Sonnets.

Published in 1609, the Sonnets were the last of Shakespeare's non-dramatic works to be printed. Scholars are not certain when each of the 154 sonnets was composed, but evidence suggests that Shakespeare wrote sonnets throughout his career for a private readership.[137] Even before the two unauthorised sonnets appeared in The Passionate Pilgrim in 1599, Francis Meres had referred in 1598 to Shakespeare's "sugred Sonnets among his private friends".[138] Few analysts believe that the published collection follows Shakespeare's intended sequence.[139] He seems to have planned two contrasting series: one about uncontrollable lust for a married woman of dark complexion (the "dark lady"), and one about conflicted love for a fair young man (the "fair youth"). It remains unclear if these figures represent real individuals, or if the authorial "I" who addresses them represents Shakespeare himself, though Wordsworth believed that with the sonnets "Shakespeare unlocked his heart".[140]

"Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate ..."
—Lines from Shakespeare's Sonnet 18.[141]

The 1609 edition was dedicated to a "Mr. W.H.", credited as "the only begetter" of the poems. It is not known whether this was written by Shakespeare himself or by the publisher, Thomas Thorpe, whose initials appear at the foot of the dedication page; nor is it known who Mr. W.H. was, despite numerous theories, or whether Shakespeare even authorised the publication.[142] Critics praise the Sonnets as a profound meditation on the nature of love, sexual passion, procreation, death, and time.[143]
Style
Main article: Shakespeare's style

Shakespeare's first plays were written in the conventional style of the day. He wrote them in a stylised language that does not always spring naturally from the needs of the characters or the drama.[144] The poetry depends on extended, sometimes elaborate metaphors and conceits, and the language is often rhetorical—written for actors to declaim rather than speak. The grand speeches in Titus Andronicus, in the view of some critics, often hold up the action, for example; and the verse in The Two Gentlemen of Verona has been described as stilted.[145]

Soon, however, Shakespeare began to adapt the traditional styles to his own purposes. The opening soliloquy of Richard III has its roots in the self-declaration of Vice in medieval drama. At the same time, Richard's vivid self-awareness looks forward to the soliloquies of Shakespeare's mature plays.[146] No single play marks a change from the traditional to the freer style. Shakespeare combined the two throughout his career, with Romeo and Juliet perhaps the best example of the mixing of the styles.[147] By the time of Romeo and Juliet, Richard II, and A Midsummer Night's Dream in the mid-1590s, Shakespeare had begun to write a more natural poetry. He increasingly tuned his metaphors and images to the needs of the drama itself.
Pity by William Blake, 1795, Tate Britain, is an illustration of two similes in Macbeth:
"And pity, like a naked new-born babe,
Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, hors'd
Upon the sightless couriers of the air."[148]

Shakespeare's standard poetic form was blank verse, composed in iambic pentameter. In practice, this meant that his verse was usually unrhymed and consisted of ten syllables to a line, spoken with a stress on every second syllable. The blank verse of his early plays is quite different from that of his later ones. It is often beautiful, but its sentences tend to start, pause, and finish at the end of lines, with the risk of monotony.[149] Once Shakespeare mastered traditional blank verse, he began to interrupt and vary its flow. This technique releases the new power and flexibility of the poetry in plays such as Julius Caesar and Hamlet. Shakespeare uses it, for example, to convey the turmoil in Hamlet's mind:[150]

    Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
    That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
    Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly—
    And prais'd be rashness for it—let us know
    Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well ...
    — Hamlet, Act 5, Scene 2, 4–8[150]

After Hamlet, Shakespeare varied his poetic style further, particularly in the more emotional passages of the late tragedies. The literary critic A. C. Bradley described this style as "more concentrated, rapid, varied, and, in construction, less regular, not seldom twisted or elliptical".[151] In the last phase of his career, Shakespeare adopted many techniques to achieve these effects. These included run-on lines, irregular pauses and stops, and extreme variations in sentence structure and length.[152] In Macbeth, for example, the language darts from one unrelated metaphor or simile to another: "was the hope drunk/ Wherein you dressed yourself?" (1.7.35–38); "... pity, like a naked new-born babe/ Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, hors'd/ Upon the sightless couriers of the air ..." (1.7.21–25). The listener is challenged to complete the sense.[152] The late romances, with their shifts in time and surprising turns of plot, inspired a last poetic style in which long and short sentences are set against one another, clauses are piled up, subject and object are reversed, and words are omitted, creating an effect of spontaneity.[153]

Shakespeare combined poetic genius with a practical sense of the theatre.[154] Like all playwrights of the time, he dramatised stories from sources such as Plutarch and Holinshed.[155] He reshaped each plot to create several centres of interest and to show as many sides of a narrative to the audience as possible. This strength of design ensures that a Shakespeare play can survive translation, cutting and wide interpretation without loss to its core drama.[156] As Shakespeare's mastery grew, he gave his characters clearer and more varied motivations and distinctive patterns of speech. He preserved aspects of his earlier style in the later plays, however. In Shakespeare's late romances, he deliberately returned to a more artificial style, which emphasised the illusion of theatre.[157]
Influence
Main article: Shakespeare's influence
Macbeth Consulting the Vision of the Armed Head. By Henry Fuseli, 1793–94. Folger Shakespeare Library, Washington.

Shakespeare's work has made a lasting impression on later theatre and literature. In particular, he expanded the dramatic potential of characterisation, plot, language, and genre.[158] Until Romeo and Juliet, for example, romance had not been viewed as a worthy topic for tragedy.[159] Soliloquies had been used mainly to convey information about characters or events; but Shakespeare used them to explore characters' minds.[160] His work heavily influenced later poetry. The Romantic poets attempted to revive Shakespearean verse drama, though with little success. Critic George Steiner described all English verse dramas from Coleridge to Tennyson as "feeble variations on Shakespearean themes."[161]

Shakespeare influenced novelists such as Thomas Hardy, William Faulkner, and Charles Dickens. The American novelist Herman Melville's soliloquies owe much to Shakespeare; his Captain Ahab in Moby-Dick is a classic tragic hero, inspired by King Lear.[162] Scholars have identified 20,000 pieces of music linked to Shakespeare's works. These include two operas by Giuseppe Verdi, Otello and Falstaff, whose critical standing compares with that of the source plays.[163] Shakespeare has also inspired many painters, including the Romantics and the Pre-Raphaelites. The Swiss Romantic artist Henry Fuseli, a friend of William Blake, even translated Macbeth into German.[164] The psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud drew on Shakespearean psychology, in particular that of Hamlet, for his theories of human nature.[165]

In Shakespeare's day, English grammar, spelling and pronunciation were less standardised than they are now,[166] and his use of language helped shape modern English.[167] Samuel Johnson quoted him more often than any other author in his A Dictionary of the English Language, the first serious work of its type.[168] Expressions such as "with bated breath" (Merchant of Venice) and "a foregone conclusion" (Othello) have found their way into everyday English speech.[169]
Critical reputation
Main articles: Shakespeare's reputation and Timeline of Shakespeare criticism

"He was not of an age, but for all time."
—Ben Jonson[170]

Shakespeare was not revered in his lifetime, but he received a large amount of praise.[171] In 1598, the cleric and author Francis Meres singled him out from a group of English writers as "the most excellent" in both comedy and tragedy.[172] The authors of the Parnassus plays at St John's College, Cambridge numbered him with Chaucer, Gower and Spenser.[173] In the First Folio, Ben Jonson called Shakespeare the "Soul of the age, the applause, delight, the wonder of our stage", though he had remarked elsewhere that "Shakespeare wanted art".
A recently garlanded statue of William Shakespeare in Lincoln Park, Chicago, typical of many created in the 19th and early 20th century.

Between the Restoration of the monarchy in 1660 and the end of the 17th century, classical ideas were in vogue. As a result, critics of the time mostly rated Shakespeare below John Fletcher and Ben Jonson.[174] Thomas Rymer, for example, condemned Shakespeare for mixing the comic with the tragic. Nevertheless, poet and critic John Dryden rated Shakespeare highly, saying of Jonson, "I admire him, but I love Shakespeare".[175] For several decades, Rymer's view held sway; but during the 18th century, critics began to respond to Shakespeare on his own terms and acclaim what they termed his natural genius. A series of scholarly editions of his work, notably those of Samuel Johnson in 1765 and Edmond Malone in 1790, added to his growing reputation.[176] By 1800, he was firmly enshrined as the national poet.[177] In the 18th and 19th centuries, his reputation also spread abroad. Among those who championed him were the writers Voltaire, Goethe, Stendhal and Victor Hugo.[178]

During the Romantic era, Shakespeare was praised by the poet and literary philosopher Samuel Taylor Coleridge; and the critic August Wilhelm Schlegel translated his plays in the spirit of German Romanticism.[179] In the 19th century, critical admiration for Shakespeare's genius often bordered on adulation.[180] "That King Shakespeare," the essayist Thomas Carlyle wrote in 1840, "does not he shine, in crowned sovereignty, over us all, as the noblest, gentlest, yet strongest of rallying signs; indestructible".[181] The Victorians produced his plays as lavish spectacles on a grand scale.[182] The playwright and critic George Bernard Shaw mocked the cult of Shakespeare worship as "bardolatry", claiming that the new naturalism of Ibsen's plays had made Shakespeare obsolete.[183]

The modernist revolution in the arts during the early 20th century, far from discarding Shakespeare, eagerly enlisted his work in the service of the avant-garde. The Expressionists in Germany and the Futurists in Moscow mounted productions of his plays. Marxist playwright and director Bertolt Brecht devised an epic theatre under the influence of Shakespeare. The poet and critic T.S. Eliot argued against Shaw that Shakespeare's "primitiveness" in fact made him truly modern.[184] Eliot, along with G. Wilson Knight and the school of New Criticism, led a movement towards a closer reading of Shakespeare's imagery. In the 1950s, a wave of new critical approaches replaced modernism and paved the way for "post-modern" studies of Shakespeare.[185] By the 1980s, Shakespeare studies were open to movements such as structuralism, feminism, New Historicism, African-American studies, and queer studies.[186][187] In a comprehensive reading of Shakespeare's works and comparing Shakespeare literary accomplishments to accomplishments among leading figures in philosophy and theology as well, Harold Bloom has commented that, "Shakespeare was larger than Plato and than St. Augustine. He encloses us, because we see with his fundamental perceptions."[188]
Works
Further information: Shakespeare bibliography and Chronology of Shakespeare's plays
Classification of the plays
The Plays of William Shakespeare. By Sir John Gilbert, 1849.

Shakespeare's works include the 36 plays printed in the First Folio of 1623, listed according to their folio classification as comedies, histories and tragedies.[189] Two plays not included in the First Folio, The Two Noble Kinsmen and Pericles, Prince of Tyre, are now accepted as part of the canon, with today's scholars agreeing that Shakespeare made major contributions to the writing of both.[190] No Shakespearean poems were included in the First Folio.

In the late 19th century, Edward Dowden classified four of the late comedies as romances, and though many scholars prefer to call them tragicomedies, Dowden's term is often used.[191] These plays and the associated Two Noble Kinsmen are marked with an asterisk (*) below. In 1896, Frederick S. Boas coined the term "problem plays" to describe four plays: All's Well That Ends Well, Measure for Measure, Troilus and Cressida and Hamlet.[192] "Dramas as singular in theme and temper cannot be strictly called comedies or tragedies", he wrote. "We may therefore borrow a convenient phrase from the theatre of today and class them together as Shakespeare's problem plays."[193] The term, much debated and sometimes applied to other plays, remains in use, though Hamlet is definitively classed as a tragedy.[194]
Speculation about Shakespeare
Authorship
Main article: Shakespeare authorship question

Around 230 years after Shakespeare's death, doubts began to be expressed about the authorship of the works attributed to him.[195] Proposed alternative candidates include Francis Bacon, Christopher Marlowe, and Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford.[196] Several "group theories" have also been proposed.[197] Only a small minority of academics believe there is reason to question the traditional attribution,[198] but interest in the subject, particularly the Oxfordian theory of Shakespeare authorship, continues into the 21st century.[199]
Religion
Main article: Religious views of William Shakespeare

Some scholars claim that members of Shakespeare's family were Catholics, at a time when practicing Catholicism in England was against the law.[200] Shakespeare's mother, Mary Arden, certainly came from a pious Catholic family. The strongest evidence might be a Catholic statement of faith signed by his father, John Shakespeare, found in 1757 in the rafters of his former house in Henley Street. The document is now lost, however, and scholars differ as to its authenticity.[201] In 1591 the authorities reported that John Shakespeare had missed church "for fear of process for debt", a common Catholic excuse.[202] In 1606, the name of William's daughter Susanna appears on a list of those who failed to attend Easter communion in Stratford.[202] As several scholars have noted, whatever his private views, Shakespeare "conformed to the official state religion", as Park Honan put it.[203][204] Also, Shakespeare's will uses a Protestant formula, and he was a confirmed member of the Church of England, where he was married, his children were baptized, and where he is buried. Other authors argue that there is a lack of evidence about Shakespeare's religious beliefs. Scholars find evidence both for and against Shakespeare's Catholicism, Protestantism, or lack of belief in his plays, but the truth may be impossible to prove.[205]
Sexuality
Main article: Sexuality of William Shakespeare

Few details of Shakespeare's sexuality are known. At 18, he married 26-year-old Anne Hathaway, who was pregnant. Susanna, the first of their three children, was born six months later on 26 May 1583. Over the centuries, some readers have posited that Shakespeare's sonnets are autobiographical,[206] and point to them as evidence of his love for a young man. Others read the same passages as the expression of intense friendship rather than romantic love.[207] The 26 so-called "Dark Lady" sonnets, addressed to a married woman, are taken as evidence of heterosexual liaisons.[208]
Portraiture
Main article: Portraits of Shakespeare

No written contemporary description of Shakespeare's physical appearance survives, and no evidence suggests that he ever commissioned a portrait, so the Droeshout engraving, which Ben Jonson approved of as a good likeness,[209] and his Stratford monument provide perhaps the best evidence of his appearance. From the 18th century, the desire for authentic Shakespeare portraits fuelled claims that various surviving pictures depicted Shakespeare. That demand also led to the production of several fake portraits, as well as mis-attributions, repaintings and relabelling of portraits of other people.[210]
See also

    English Renaissance theatre
    Spelling of Shakespeare's name
    World Shakespeare Bibliography

Notes
Footnotes

Dates follow the Julian calendar, used in England throughout Shakespeare's lifespan, but with the start of the year adjusted to 1 January (see Old Style and New Style dates). Under the Gregorian calendar, adopted in Catholic countries in 1582, Shakespeare died on 3 May (Schoenbaum 1987, xv).
The "national cult" of Shakespeare, and the "bard" identification, dates from September 1769, when the actor David Garrick organised a week-long carnival at Stratford to mark the town council awarding him the freedom of the town. In addition to presenting the town with a statue of Shakespeare, Garrick composed a doggerel verse, lampooned in the London newspapers, naming the banks of the Avon as the birthplace of the "matchless Bard" (McIntyre 1999, 412–432).
The exact figures are unknown. See Shakespeare's collaborations and Shakespeare Apocrypha for further details.
Individual play dates and precise writing span are unknown. See Chronology of Shakespeare's plays for further details.
The crest is a silver falcon supporting a spear, while the motto is Non Sanz Droict (French for "not without right"). This motto is still used by Warwickshire County Council, in reference to Shakespeare.

    In the scribal abbreviations ye for the (3rd line) and yt for that (3rd and 4th lines) the letter y represents in fact th: see article thorn.

Citations

"Shakespeare" entry in Collins English Dictionary, HarperCollins Publishers, 1998.
Greenblatt 2005, 11; Bevington 2002, 1–3; Wells 1997, 399.
Dobson 1992, 185–186
Craig 2003, 3.
Shapiro 2005, xvii–xviii; Schoenbaum 1991, 41, 66, 397–98, 402, 409; Taylor 1990, 145, 210–23, 261–5
Chambers 1930, Vol. 1: 270–71; Taylor 1987, 109–134.
The Norton Anthology of English Literature: Sixteenth/Early Seventeenth Century, Volume B, 2012, pg. 1168
Kennedy, Maeve (1 January 2016). "Shakespeare's 400th anniversary: 'man of Stratford' to be celebrated in 2016". The Guardian. Retrieved 13 January 2016.
Schoenbaum 1987, 14–22.
Schoenbaum 1987, 24–6.
Schoenbaum 1987, 24, 296; Honan 1998, 15–16.
Schoenbaum 1987, 23–24.
Schoenbaum 1987, 62–63; Ackroyd 2006, 53; Wells et al. 2005, xv–xvi
Baldwin 1944, 464.
Baldwin 1944, 179–80, 183; Cressy 1975, 28, 29.
Baldwin 1944, 117.
Schoenbaum 1987, 77–78.
Wood 2003, 84; Schoenbaum 1987, 78–79.
Schoenbaum 1987, 93.
Schoenbaum 1987, 94.
Schoenbaum 1987, 224.
Bate 2008, 314.
Schoenbaum 1987, 95.
Schoenbaum 1987, 97–108; Rowe 1709.
Schoenbaum 1987, 144–45.
Schoenbaum 1987, 110–11.
Honigmann 1999, 1; Wells et al. 2005, xvii
Honigmann 1999, 95–117; Wood 2003, 97–109.
Wells et al. 2005, 666
Chambers 1930, Vol. 1: 287, 292
Greenblatt 2005, 213.
Greenblatt 2005, 213; Schoenbaum 1987, 153.
Ackroyd 2006, 176.
Schoenbaum 1987, 151–52
Wells 2006, 28; Schoenbaum 1987, 144–46; Chambers 1930, Vol. 1: 59.
Schoenbaum 1987, 184.
Chambers 1923, 208–209.
Chambers 1930, Vol. 2: 67–71.
Bentley 1961, 36.
Schoenbaum 1987, 188; Kastan 1999, 37; Knutson 2001, 17
Adams 1923, 275
Wells 2006, 28.
Schoenbaum 1987, 200.
Schoenbaum 1987, 200–201.
Rowe 1709.
Ackroyd 2006, 357; Wells et al. 2005, xxii
Schoenbaum 1987, 202–3.
Hales 1904, pp. 401–2.
Honan 1998, 121.
Shapiro 2005, 122.
Honan 1998, 325; Greenblatt 2005, 405.
Ackroyd 2006, 476.
Wood 1806, pp. ix–x, lxxii.
Smith 1964, p. 558.
Ackroyd 2006, p. 477.
Barroll 1991, pp. 179–82.
Bate 2008, 354–355.
Honan 1998, 382–83.
Honan 1998, 326; Ackroyd 2006, 462–464.
Schoenbaum 1987, 272–274.
Honan 1998, 387.
Schoenbaum 1987, 279.
Honan 1998, 375–78.
Schoenbaum 1987, 276.
His age and the date are inscribed in Latin on his funerary monument: AETATIS 53 DIE 23 APR
Schoenbaum, Samuel. Shakespeare's Lives. Oxford University Press. 1991. ISBN 978-0-19-818618-2. Page 78.
Rowse, A. L. William Shakespeare; A Biography. Harper & Row. 1963. Page 453.
Kinney, Arthur F., editor. The Oxford Handbook of Shakespeare. Oxford University Press. 2012. ISBN 978-0-19-956610-5. Page 11. Verse by James Mabbe printed in the First Folio.
Schoenbaum 1987, 287.
Schoenbaum 1987, 292, 294.
"William Shakespeare Featured Article". Thegenealogist.co.uk. Retrieved 19 March 2014.
Schoenbaum 1987, 304.
Honan 1998, 395–96.
Chambers 1930, Vol. 2: 8, 11, 104; Schoenbaum 1987, 296.
Chambers 1930, Vol. 2: 7, 9, 13; Schoenbaum 1987, 289, 318–19.
Charles Knight, 1842, in his notes on Twelfth Night, quoted in Schoenbaum 1991, 275.
Ackroyd 2006, 483; Frye 2005, 16; Greenblatt 2005, 145–6.
Schoenbaum 1987, 301–3.
Schoenbaum 1987, 306–07; Wells et al. 2005, xviii
BBC News 2008.
Schoenbaum 1987, 306.
Schoenbaum 1987, 308–10.
Cooper 2006, 48.
Thomson, Peter, "Conventions of Playwriting". in Wells & Orlin 2003, 49.
Frye 2005, 9; Honan 1998, 166.
Schoenbaum 1987, 159–61; Frye 2005, 9.
Dutton & Howard 2003, 147.
Ribner 2005, 154–155.
Frye 2005, 105; Ribner 2005, 67; Cheney 2004, 100.
Honan 1998, 136; Schoenbaum 1987, 166.
Frye 2005, 91; Honan 1998, 116–117; Werner 2001, 96–100.
Friedman 2006, 159.
Ackroyd 2006, 235.
Wood 2003, 161–162.
Wood 2003, 205–206; Honan 1998, 258.
Ackroyd 2006, 359.
Ackroyd 2006, 362–383.
Shapiro 2005, 150; Gibbons 1993, 1; Ackroyd 2006, 356.
Wood 2003, 161; Honan 1998, 206.
Ackroyd 2006, 353, 358; Shapiro 2005, 151–153.
Shapiro 2005, 151.
Bradley 1991, 85; Muir 2005, 12–16.
Bradley 1991, 94.
Bradley 1991, 86.
Bradley 1991, 40, 48.
Bradley 1991, 42, 169, 195; Greenblatt 2005, 304.
Bradley 1991, 226; Ackroyd 2006, 423; Kermode 2004, 141–2.
McDonald 2006, 43–46.
Bradley 1991, 306.
Ackroyd 2006, 444; McDonald 2006, 69–70; Eliot 1934, 59.
Dowden 1881, 57.
Dowden 1881, 60; Frye 2005, 123; McDonald 2006, 15.
Wells et al. 2005, 1247, 1279
Wells et al. 2005, xx
Wells et al. 2005, xxi
Shapiro 2005, 16.
Foakes 1990, 6; Shapiro 2005, 125–31.
Foakes 1990, 6; Nagler 1958, 7; Shapiro 2005, 131–2.
Wells et al. 2005, xxii
Foakes 1990, 33.
Ackroyd 2006, 454; Holland 2000, xli.
Ringler 1997, 127.
Schoenbaum 1987, 210; Chambers 1930, Vol. 1: 341.
Shapiro 2005, 247–9.
Wells et al. 2005, 1247
Wells et al. 2005, xxxvii
Wells et al. 2005, xxxiv
Pollard 1909, xi.
Wells et al. 2005, xxxiv; Pollard 1909, xi; Maguire 1996, 28.
Bowers 1955, 8–10; Wells et al. 2005, xxxiv–xxxv
Wells et al. 2005, 909, 1153
Rowe 2006, 21.
Frye 2005, 288.
Rowe 2006, 3, 21.
Rowe 2006, 1; Jackson 2004, 267–294; Honan 1998, 289.
Rowe 2006, 1; Honan 1998, 289; Schoenbaum 1987, 327.
Wood 2003, 178; Schoenbaum 1987, 180.
Honan 1998, 180.
Schoenbaum 1987, 268.
Honan 1998, 180; Schoenbaum 1987, 180.
Shakespeare 1914.
Schoenbaum 1987, 268–269.
Wood 2003, 177.
Clemen 2005a, 150.
Frye 2005, 105, 177; Clemen 2005b, 29.
Brooke 2004, 69; Bradbrook 2004, 195.
Clemen 2005b, 63.
de Sélincourt 1909, 174
Frye 2005, 185.
Wright 2004, 868.
Bradley 1991, 91.
McDonald 2006, 42–6.
McDonald 2006, 36, 39, 75.
Gibbons 1993, 4.
Gibbons 1993, 1–4.
Gibbons 1993, 1–7, 15.
McDonald 2006, 13; Meagher 2003, 358.
Chambers 1944, 35.
Levenson 2000, 49–50.
Clemen 1987, 179.
Steiner 1996, 145.
Bryant 1998, 82.
Gross, John, "Shakespeare's Influence" in Wells & Orlin 2003, 641–2.
Paraisz 2006, 130.
Bloom, Harold. The Western Canon. New York, Riverhead Books, p.346
Cercignani 1981.
Crystal 2001, 55–65, 74.
Wain 1975, 194.
Johnson 2002, 12; Crystal 2001, 63.
Jonson 1996, 10.
Dominik 1988, 9; Grady 2001b, 267.
Grady 2001b, 265; Greer 1986, 9.
Grady 2001b, 266.
Grady 2001b, 269.
Dryden 1889, 71.
Grady 2001b, 270–27; Levin 1986, 217.
Dobson 1992 Cited by Grady 2001b, 270.
Grady 2001b, 272–274. Grady cites Voltaire's Philosophical Letters (1733); Goethe's Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship (1795); Stendhal's two-part pamphlet Racine et Shakespeare (1823–25); and Victor Hugo's prefaces to Cromwell (1827) and William Shakespeare (1864).
Levin 1986, 223.
Sawyer 2003, 113.
Carlyle 1907, 161.
Schoch 2002, 58–59.
Grady 2001b, 276.
Grady 2001a, 22–6.
Grady 2001a, 24.
Grady 2001a, 29.
Drakakis 1985, 16–17, 23–25
Harold Bloom (2006). Shakespeare Through the Ages: King Lear, p. xii.
Boyce 1996, 91, 193, 513..
Kathman 2003, 629; Boyce 1996, 91.
Edwards 1958, 1–10; Snyder & Curren-Aquino 2007.
Schanzer 1963, 1–10.
Boas 1896, 345.
Schanzer 1963, 1; Bloom 1999, 325–380; Berry 2005, 37.
Shapiro 2010, 77–8.
Gibson 2005, 48, 72, 124.
McMichael & Glenn 1962, p. 56.
Did He or Didn't He? That Is the Question, The New York Times, 22 April 2007
Kathman 2003, 620, 625–626; Love 2002, 194–209; Schoenbaum 1991, 430–40.
Pritchard 1979, 3.
Wood 2003, 75–8; Ackroyd 2006, 22–3.
Wood 2003, 78; Ackroyd 2006, 416; Schoenbaum 1987, 41–2, 286.
Rowse, A. L. (1963). William Shakespeare: A Biography. London: Macmillan. ISBN 0-06-013710-X.
A. L. Rowse, as quoted in The Portsmouth Institute (2013). "Newman and the Intellectual Tradition: Portsmouth Review", Sheed & Ward. p. 127: "He died, as he had lived, a conforming member of the Church of England. His will made that perfectly clear – in facts, puts it beyond dispute, for it uses the Protestant formula."
Wilson 2004, 34; Shapiro 2005, 167.
Lee 1900, 55
Casey 1998; Pequigney 1985; Evans 1996, 132.
Fort 1927, 406–414.
Cooper 2006, 48, 57.

    Schoenbaum 1981, 190.

References

    Ackroyd, Peter (2006), Shakespeare: The Biography, London: Vintage, ISBN 978-0-7493-8655-9.
    Adams, Joseph Quincy (1923), A Life of William Shakespeare, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, OCLC 1935264.
    Baldwin, T. W. (1944), William Shakspere's Small Latine & Lesse Greek 1, Urbana, Ill: University of Illinois Press, OCLC 359037.
    Barroll, Leeds (1991), Politics, Plague, and Shakespeare's Theater: The Stuart Years, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, ISBN 0-8014-2479-8.
    Bate, Jonathan (2008), The Soul of the Age, London: Penguin, ISBN 978-0-670-91482-1.
    BBC News (28 May 2008). "Bard's 'cursed' tomb is revamped". British Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 23 April 2010.
    Bentley, G. E. (1961), Shakespeare: A Biographical Handbook, New Haven: Yale University Press, ISBN 0-313-25042-1, OCLC 356416.
    Berry, Ralph (2005), Changing Styles in Shakespeare, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-35316-5.
    Bertolini, John Anthony (1993), Shaw and Other Playwrights, Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press, ISBN 0-271-00908-X.
    Bevington, David (2002), Shakespeare, Oxford: Blackwell, ISBN 0-631-22719-9.
    Bloom, Harold (1999), Shakespeare: The Invention of the Human, New York: Riverhead Books, ISBN 1-57322-751-X.
    Boas, F. S. (1896), Shakspere and His Predecessors, New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.
    Bowers, Fredson (1955), On Editing Shakespeare and the Elizabethan Dramatists, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, OCLC 2993883.
    Boyce, Charles (1996), Dictionary of Shakespeare, Ware, Herts, UK: Wordsworth, ISBN 1-85326-372-9.
    Bradbrook, M. C. (2004), "Shakespeare's Recollection of Marlowe", in Edwards, Philip; Ewbank, Inga-Stina; Hunter, G. K., Shakespeare's Styles: Essays in Honour of Kenneth Muir, Cambridge University Press, pp. 191–204, ISBN 0-521-61694-8.
    Bradley, A. C. (1991), Shakespearean Tragedy: Lectures on Hamlet, Othello, King Lear and Macbeth, London: Penguin, ISBN 0-14-053019-3.
    Brooke, Nicholas (2004), "Language and Speaker in Macbeth", in Edwards, Philip; Ewbank, Inga-Stina; Hunter, G. K., Shakespeare's Styles: Essays in Honour of Kenneth Muir, Cambridge University Press, pp. 67–78, ISBN 0-521-61694-8
    Bryant, John (1998), "Moby Dick as Revolution", in Levine, Robert Steven, The Cambridge Companion to Herman Melville, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-55571-X.
    Carlyle, Thomas (1907), Adams, John Chester, ed., On Heroes, Hero-worship, and the Heroic in History, Boston: Houghton, Mifflin and Company, ISBN 1-4069-4419-X, OCLC 643782.
    Casey, Charles (1998). "Was Shakespeare gay? Sonnet 20 and the politics of pedagogy". College Literature 25 (3): 35–51. doi:10.2307/25112402. JSTOR 25112402..
    Cercignani, Fausto (1981), Shakespeare's Works and Elizabethan Pronunciation, Oxford: University Press (Clarendon Press).
    Chambers, E. K. (1923), The Elizabethan Stage 2, Oxford: Clarendon Press, ISBN 0-19-811511-3, OCLC 336379.
    Chambers, E. K. (1944), Shakespearean Gleanings, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-8492-0506-9, OCLC 2364570.
    Chambers, E. K. (1930), William Shakespeare: A Study of Facts and Problems, 2 vols., Oxford: Clarendon Press, ISBN 0-19-811774-4, OCLC 353406.
    Cheney, Patrick Gerard (2004), The Cambridge Companion to Christopher Marlowe, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-52734-1.
    Clemen, Wolfgang (2005a), Shakespeare's Dramatic Art: Collected Essays, New York: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-35278-9.
    Clemen, Wolfgang (2005b), Shakespeare's Imagery, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-35280-0.
    Clemen, Wolfgang (1987), Shakespeare's Soliloquies, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-35277-0.
    Cooper, Tarnya (2006), Searching for Shakespeare, National Portrait Gallery and Yale Center for British Art: Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0-300-11611-3.
    Craig, Leon Harold (2003), Of Philosophers and Kings: Political Philosophy in Shakespeare's "Macbeth" and "King Lear", Toronto: University of Toronto Press, ISBN 0-8020-8605-5.
    Cressy, David (1975), Education in Tudor and Stuart England, New York: St Martin's Press, ISBN 0-7131-5817-4, OCLC 2148260.
    Crystal, David (2001), The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-40179-8.
    de Sélincourt, Basil (1909), William Blake, London: Duckworth & co.
    Dobson, Michael (1992), The making of the national poet, Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-818323-5.
    Dominik, Mark (1988), Shakespeare–Middleton Collaborations, Beaverton, OR: Alioth Press, ISBN 0-945088-01-9.
    Dowden, Edward (1881), Shakspere, New York: Appleton & Co., OCLC 8164385.
    Drakakis, John (1985), Drakakis, John, ed., Alternative Shakespeares, New York: Meuthen, ISBN 0-416-36860-3.
    Dryden, John (1889), Arnold, Thomas, ed., An Essay of Dramatic Poesy, Oxford: Clarendon Press, ISBN 81-7156-323-6, OCLC 7847292.
    Duncan Jones, Katherine, ed. (1997), Shakespeare's Sonnets, London: Thomas Learning, retrieved 26 December 2013
    Dutton, Richard; Howard, Jean (2003), A Companion to Shakespeare's Works: The Histories, Oxford: Blackwell, ISBN 0-631-22633-8.
    Edwards, Phillip (1958), "Shakespeare's Romances: 1900–1957", in Nicoll, Allardyce, Shakespeare Survey 11, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-21500-5, OCLC 15880120.
    Eliot, T. S. (1934), Elizabethan Essays, London: Faber & Faber, ISBN 0-15-629051-0, OCLC 9738219.
    Evans, G. Blakemore (1996), "Commentary", in Shakespeare, William; Evans, G. Blakemore (ed.), The Sonnets, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-22225-7.
    Foakes, R. A. (1990), "Playhouses and Players", in Braunmuller, A.; Hattaway, Michael, The Cambridge Companion to English Renaissance Drama, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-38662-4.
    Fort, J. A. (October 1927), "The Story Contained in the Second Series of Shakespeare's Sonnets", The Review of English Studies 3 (12).
    Friedman, Michael D. (2006), "'I'm not a feminist director but ...': Recent Feminist Productions of The Taming of the Shrew", in Nelsen, Paul; Schlueter, June, Acts of Criticism: Performance Matters in Shakespeare and his Contemporaries: Essays in Honor of James P. Lusardi, New Jersey: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, ISBN 0-8386-4059-1.
    Frye, Roland Mushat (2005), The Art of the Dramatist, London; New York: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-35289-4.
    Gibbons, Brian (1993), Shakespeare and Multiplicity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-44406-3.
    Gibson, H. N. (2005), The Shakespeare Claimants: A Critical Survey of the Four Principal Theories Concerning the Authorship of the Shakespearean Plays, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-35290-8.
    Grady, Hugh (2001a), "Modernity, Modernism and Postmodernism in the Twentieth Century's Shakespeare", in Bristol, Michael; McLuskie, Kathleen, Shakespeare and Modern Theatre: The Performance of Modernity, New York: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-21984-1.
    Grady, Hugh (2001b), "Shakespeare Criticism 1600–1900", in deGrazia, Margreta; Wells, Stanley, The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-65094-1.
    Greenblatt, Stephen (2005), Will in the World: How Shakespeare Became Shakespeare, London: Pimlico, ISBN 0-7126-0098-1.
    Greer, Germaine (1986), William Shakespeare, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-287538-8.
    Hales, John W. (January–June 1904). "London Residences of Shakespeare". The Athenaeum (London: John C. Francis): 401–2. Retrieved 8 December 2013..
    Halliwell-Phillipps, James Orchard (1887), Outlines of the Life of Shakespeare II, London: Longmans Green and Co., retrieved 26 December 2013.
    Holland, Peter (2000), "Introduction", in Shakespeare, William; Holland, Peter (ed.), Cymbeline, London: Penguin, ISBN 0-14-071472-3.
    Honan, Park (1998), Shakespeare: A Life, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-811792-2.
    Honigmann, E. A. J. (1999), Shakespeare: The Lost Years (Revised ed.), Manchester: Manchester University Press, ISBN 0-7190-5425-7.
    Jackson, MacDonald P. (2004), "A Lover's Complaint Revisited", in Zimmerman, Susan, Shakespeare Studies, Cranbury, NJ: Associated University Press, ISBN 0-8386-4120-2.
    Johnson, Samuel (2002), Lynch, Jack, ed., Samuel Johnson's Dictionary: Selections from the 1755 Work that Defined the English Language, Delray Beach, FL: Levenger Press, ISBN 1-84354-296-X.
    Jonson, Ben (1996), "To the memory of my beloued, The AVTHOR MR. WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE: AND what he hath left vs", in Shakespeare, William; Hinman, Charlton (ed.); Blayney, The First Folio of Shakespeare (2nd ed.), New York: W. W. Norton & Company, ISBN 0-393-03985-4.
    Kastan, David Scott (1999), Shakespeare After Theory, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-90112-X.
    Kathman, David (2003), "The Question of Authorship", in Wells, Stanley; Orlin, Lena Cowen, Shakespeare: an Oxford Guide, Oxford Guides, Oxford University Press, pp. 620–32, ISBN 978-0-19-924522-2
    Kermode, Frank (2004), The Age of Shakespeare, London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson, ISBN 0-297-84881-X.
    Knutson, Roslyn (2001), Playing Companies and Commerce in Shakespeare's Time, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-77242-7.
    Lee, Sidney (1900), Shakespeare's Life and Work, London: Smith Elder & Co..
    Levenson, Jill L. (2000), "Introduction", in Shakespeare, William; Levenson, Jill L. (ed.), Romeo and Juliet, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-281496-6.
    Levin, Harry (1986), "Critical Approaches to Shakespeare from 1660 to 1904", in Wells, Stanley, The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare Studies, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-31841-6.
    Love, Harold (2002), Attributing Authorship: An Introduction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-78948-6.
    Maguire, Laurie E. (1996), Shakespearean Suspect Texts: The "Bad" Quartos and Their Contexts, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-47364-0.
    McDonald, Russ (2006), Shakespeare's Late Style, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-82068-5.
    McIntyre, Ian (1999), Garrick, Harmondsworth, England: Allen Lane, ISBN 0-7139-9328-6.
    McMichael, George; Glenn, Edgar M. (1962), Shakespeare and his Rivals: A Casebook on the Authorship Controversy, New York: Odyssey Press, OCLC 2113359.
    Meagher, John C. (2003), Pursuing Shakespeare's Dramaturgy: Some Contexts, Resources, and Strategies in his Playmaking, New Jersey: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, ISBN 0-8386-3993-3.
    Muir, Kenneth (2005), Shakespeare's Tragic Sequence, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-35325-4.
    Nagler, A. M. (1958), Shakespeare's Stage, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, ISBN 0-300-02689-7.
    Paraisz, Júlia (2006), "The Nature of a Romantic Edition", in Holland, Peter, Shakespeare Survey 59, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-86838-6.
    Pequigney, Joseph (1985), Such Is My Love: A Study of Shakespeare's Sonnets, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0-226-65563-6.
    Pollard, Alfred W. (1909), Shakespeare Quartos and Folios: A Study in the Bibliography of Shakespeare's Plays, 1594–1685, London: Methuen, OCLC 46308204.
    Pritchard, Arnold (1979), Catholic Loyalism in Elizabethan England, Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, ISBN 0-8078-1345-1.
    Ribner, Irving (2005), The English History Play in the Age of Shakespeare, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-35314-9.
    Ringler, William, Jr. (1997), "Shakespeare and His Actors: Some Remarks on King Lear", in Ogden, James; Scouten, In Lear from Study to Stage: Essays in Criticism, New Jersey: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, ISBN 0-8386-3690-X.
    Rowe, John (2006), "Introduction", in Shakespeare, William; Rowe, John (ed.), The Poems: Venus and Adonis, The Rape of Lucrece, The Phoenix and the Turtle, The Passionate Pilgrim, A Lover's Complaint, by William Shakespeare (2nd revised ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-85551-9.
    Rowe, Nicholas (1709), Gray, Terry A., ed., Some Acount of the Life &c. of Mr. William Shakespear (published 1997), retrieved 30 July 2007.
    Sawyer, Robert (2003), Victorian Appropriations of Shakespeare, New Jersey: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, ISBN 0-8386-3970-4.
    Schanzer, Ernest (1963), The Problem Plays of Shakespeare, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, ISBN 0-415-35305-X, OCLC 2378165.
    Schoch, Richard (2002), "Pictorial Shakespeare", in Wells, Stanley; Stanton, Sarah, The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare on Stage, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-79711-X.
    Schoenbaum, S. (1981), William Shakespeare: Records and Images, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-520234-2
    Schoenbaum, Samuel (1991), Shakespeare's Lives, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-818618-5.
    Schoenbaum, Samuel (1987), William Shakespeare: A Compact Documentary Life (Revised ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-505161-0.
    Shakespeare, William (1914), "Sonnet 18", in Craig, W. J., The Oxford Shakespeare: the Complete Works of William Shakespeare (Bartleby.com (2000) ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, retrieved 22 June 2007.
    Shapiro, James (2005), 1599: A Year in the Life of William Shakespeare, London: Faber and Faber, ISBN 0-571-21480-0.
    Shapiro, James (2010), Contested Will: Who Wrote Shakespeare?, New York: Simon & Schuster, ISBN 978-1-4165-4162-2.
    Smith, Irwin (1964), Shakespeare's Blackfriars Playhouse, New York: New York University Press.
    Snyder, Susan; Curren-Aquino, Deborah (2007), "Introduction", in Shakespeare, William; Snyder, Susan (ed.); Curren-Aquino, Deborah (ed.), The Winter's Tale, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-22158-7.
    Steiner, George (1996), The Death of Tragedy, New Haven: Yale University Press, ISBN 0-300-06916-2.
    Taylor, Gary (1990), Reinventing Shakespeare: A Cultural History from the Restoration to the Present, London: Hogarth Press, ISBN 0-7012-0888-0.
    Taylor, Gary (1987), William Shakespeare: A Textual Companion, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-812914-9.
    Wain, John (1975), Samuel Johnson, New York: Viking, ISBN 0-670-61671-0.
    Wells, Stanley; Taylor, Gary; Jowett, John; Montgomery, William, eds. (2005), The Oxford Shakespeare: The Complete Works (2nd ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-926717-0.
    Wells, Stanley (1997), Shakespeare: A Life in Drama, New York: W. W. Norton, ISBN 0-393-31562-2.
    Wells, Stanley (2006), Shakespeare & Co, New York: Pantheon, ISBN 0-375-42494-6.
    Wells, Stanley; Orlin, Lena Cowen, eds. (2003), Shakespeare: An Oxford Guide, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-924522-3.
    Werner, Sarah (2001), Shakespeare and Feminist Performance, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-22729-1.
    Wilson, Richard (2004), Secret Shakespeare: Studies in Theatre, Religion and Resistance, Manchester: Manchester University Press, ISBN 0-7190-7024-4.
    Wood, Manley, ed. (1806), The Plays of William Shakespeare with Notes of Various Commentators I, London: George Kearsley, retrieved 27 December 2013.
    Wood, Michael (2003), Shakespeare, New York: Basic Books, ISBN 0-465-09264-0.
    Wright, George T. (2004), "The Play of Phrase and Line", in McDonald, Russ, Shakespeare: An Anthology of Criticism and Theory, 1945–2000, Oxford: Blackwell, ISBN 0-631-23488-8.

